the spear danes in days gone by and the kings who ruled them had courage and greatness. we have heard of those princes’ heroic campaigns. there was shield sheafson, scourge of many tribes, a wrecker of mead benches, rampaging among foes. this terror of the hill troops had come far. a foundling to start with, he would flourish later on as his powers waxed and his worth was proved. in the end each clan on the outlying coasts beyond the whale road had to yield to him and begin to pay tribute. that was one good king. afterwards a boychild was born to shield, a cub in the yard, a comfort sent by god to that nation. he knew what they had tolled, the long times and troubles they’d come through without a leader; so the lord of life, the glorious almighty, made this man renowned. shield had fathered a famous son beow’s name was known through the north. and a young prince must be prudent like that, giving freely while his father lives so that afterwards in age when fighting starts steadfast companions will stand beside him and hold the line. behavior that’s admired is the path to power among people everywhere. shield was still thriving when his time came and he crossed over into the lord’s keeping. his warrior band did what he bade them when he laid down the law among the danes they shouldered him out to the sea’s flood, the chief they revered who had long ruled them. a ring whorled prow rode in the harbor, ice clad, outbound, a craft for a prince. they stretched their beloved lord in his boat, laid out by the mast, amidships, the great ring giver. farfetched treasures were piled upon him, and precious gear. i never heard before of a ship so well furbished with battle tackle, bladed weapons and coats of mail. the massed treasure  was loaded on top of him it would travel far on out into the ocean’s sway. they decked his body no less bountifully with offerings than those first ones did who cast him away when he was a child and launched him alone out over the waves. and they set a gold standard up high above his head and let him drift to wind and tide, bewailing him and mourning their loss. no man can tell, no wise man in hall or weathered veteran knows for certain who salvaged that load. then it fell to beow to keep the forts. he was well regarded and ruled the danes for a long time after his father took leave of his life on earth. and then his heir, the great halfdane, held sway for as long as he lived, their elder and warlord. he was four times a father, this fighter prince one by one they entered the world, heorogar, hrothgar, the good halga and a daughter, i have heard, who was onela’s queen, a balm in bed to the battle-scarred swede. the fortunes of war favored hrothgar. friends and kinsmen flocked to his ranks, young followers, a force that grew to be a mighty army. so his mind turned to hall building he handed down orders for men to work on a great mead hall meant to be a wonder of the world forever; it would be his throne room and there he would dispense his god-given goods to young and old but not the common land or people’s lives. far and wide through the world, i have heard, orders for work to adorn that wall stead were sent to many peoples. and soon it stood there, finished and ready, in full view, the hall of halls. heorot was the name he had settled on it, whose utterance was law. nor did he renege, but doled out rings and torques at the table. the hall towered, its gables wide and high and awaiting a barbarous burning. that doom abided, but in time it would come the killer instinct unleashed among in-laws, the bloodlust rampant. then a powerful demon, a prowler through the dark, nursed a hard grievance. it harrowed him to hear the din of the loud banquet every day in the hall, the harp being struck and the clear song of a skilled poet telling with mastery of man’s beginnings, how the almighty had made the earth a gleaming plain girdled with waters; in his splendor he set the sun and moon to be earth’s lamplight, lanterns for men, and filled the broad lap of the world with branches and leaves; and quickened life in every other thing that moved. so times were pleasant for the people there until finally one, a fiend out of hell, began to work his evil in the world. grendel was the name of this grim demon haunting the marches, marauding round the heath and the desolate fens; he had dwelt for a time in misery among the banished monsters, cain’s clan, whom the creator had outlawed and condemned as outcasts. for the killing of abel the eternal lord had exacted a price cain got no good from committing that murder because the almighty made him anathema  and out of the curse of his exile there sprang ogres and elves and evil phantoms and the giants too who strove with god time and again until he gave them their final reward. so, after nightfall, grendel set out for the lofty house, to see how the ringdanes were settling into it after their drink, and there he came upon them, a company of the best asleep from their feasting, insensible to pain and human sorrow. suddenly then the god cursed brute was creating havoc greedy and grim, he grabbed thirty men from their resting places and rushed to his lair, flushed up and inflamed from the raid, blundering back with the butchered corpses. then as dawn brightened and the day broke grendel’s powers of destruction were plain their wassail was over, they wept to heaven and mourned under morning. their mighty prince, the storied leader, sat stricken and helpless, humiliated by the loss of his guard, bewildered, and stunned, staring aghast and the demon’s trail, in deep distress. he was numb with grief, but got no respite for one night later the merciless grendel struck again with more gruesome murders. malignant by nature, he never showed remorse. it was easy then to meet with a man shifting himself to a safer distance to bed in the bothies, for who could be blind to the evidence of his eyes, the obviousness of that hall watcher’s hate? whoever escaped kept an eye open and moved away. so grendel ruled in defiance of right, one against all, until the greatest house in the world stood empty, a deserted wall stead. for twelve winters, seasons of woe, the lord of the shieldings suffered under his load of sorrow; and so, before long, the news was known over the whole world. sad lays were sung about the beset king, the vicious raids of grendel, his long and unrelenting feud, nothing but war; how he would never parley or make peace with any dane nor stop his death dealing nor pay the death price. no counsellor could ever expect fair reparation from those rabid hands. all were endangered; young and old were hunted down by that dark death shadow who lurked and swooped in the long nights on the misty moors; nobody knows where these reavers from hell roam on their errands. so grendel waged his lonely war, inflicting constant cruelties on the people, atrocious hurt. he took over heorot, haunted the glittering hall after dark, but the throne itself, the treasure seat, he was kept from approaching;; he was the lord’s outcast. these were hard times, heartbreaking for the prince of the shieldings; powerful counselors, the highest in the land, would lend advice, plotting how best the bold defenders might resist and beat off sudden attacks. sometimes at pagan shrines they vowed offering to idols, swore oaths that the killer of souls might come to their aid and save the people. that was their way, their heathenish hope; deep in their hearts they remembered hell. the almighty judge of good deeds and bad, the lord god, head of the heavens and high king of the world, was unknown to them. oh, cursed is he who in time of trouble had to thrust his soul in the fire’s embrace, forfeiting help; he has nowhere to turn. but blessed is he who after death can approach the lord and find friendship in the father’s embrace. so that troubled time continued, woe that never stopped, steady affliction for halfdane’s son, too hard an ordeal. there was panic after dark, people endured raids in the night, riven by terror. when he heard about grendel, hygelac’s thane was on home ground, over in geatland. there was no one else like him alive. in his day, he was the mightiest man on earth, highborn and powerful. he ordered a boat that would ply the waves. he announced his plan to sail the swan’s roads and search out that king, the famous prince who needed defenders. nobody tried to keep him from going, no elder denied him, dear as he was to them. instead, they inspected omens and spurred his ambition to go, whilst he moved about like the leader he was, enlisting men, the best he could find; with fourteen others the warrior boarded the boat as captain, a canny pilot along coast and currents. time went by, the boat was on water, in close under the cliffs. men climbed eagerly up the gangplank, sand churned in surf, shining war gear in the vessel’s hold, then heaved out, away with a will in their wood wreathed ship. over the waves, with the wind behind her and foam at her neck, she flew like a bird until her curved prow had covered the distance and on the following day, at the due hour, those seafarers sighted land, sunlit cliffs, sheer crags and looming headlands, the landfall they sought. it was the end of their voyage and the geats vaulted over the side, out on to the sand, and moored their ship. there was a clash of mail and a thresh of gear. they thanked god for that easy crossing on a calm sea. when the watchman on the wall, the shieldings’ lookout whose job it was to guard the sea cliffs, saw shields glittering on the gangplank and battle equipment being unloaded he had to find out who and what the arrivals were. so he rode to the shore, this horseman of hrothgar’s, and challenged them in formal terms, flourishing his spear what kind of men are you who arrive rigged out for combat in coats of mail, sailing here over the sea lanes in your steep hulled boat? i have been stationed as lookout on this coast for a long time. my job is to watch the waves for raiders, and danger to the danish shore. never before has a force under arms disembarked so openly not bothering to ask if the sentries allowed them safe passage or the clan had consented. nor have i seen a mightier man-at-arms on this earth than the one standing here unless i am mistaken, he is truly noble. this is no mere hangeron in a hero’s armor. so now, before you fare inland as interlopers, i have to be informed about who you are and where you hail from.  outsiders from across the water, i say it again the sooner you tell where you came from and why, the better. the leader of the troop unlocked his word-hoard; the distinguished one delivered this answer we belong by birth to the geat people and owe allegiance to lord hygelac. in my day, my father was a famous man, a noble warrior name ecgtheow. he outlasted many a long winter and went on his way. all over the world wise men in council continue to remember him. we come in good faith to find your lord and nation’s shield, the son of halfdane. give us the right to advise and direction. we have arrived here on a great errand to the lord of the danes, and i believe therefore there should be nothing hidden or withheld between us. so tell us if what we have heard is true about this threat, whatever it is, this danger abroad in the dark nights, this corpse maker mongering death in the shieldings’ country. i come to proffer my wholehearted help and counsel. i can show the wise hrothgar a way to defeat his enemy and find respite. if any respite is to reach him, ever. i can calm the turmoil and terror in his mind. otherwise, he must endure woes and live with grief for as long as his hall stands at the horizon, on its high ground. undaunted, sitting astride his horse, the coastguard answered, anyone with gumption and a sharp mind will take the measure of two things what’s said and what’s done. i believe what you have told me that you are a troop  loyal to our king. so come ahead with your arms and your gear, and i will guide you. what’s more, i’ll order my own comrades on their word of honor to watch your boat down there on the strand keep her safe in her fresh tar, until the time comes for her curved prow to preen on the waves and bear this hero back to geatland. may one so valiant and venturesome come unharmed through the clash of battle. so they went on their way. the ship rode the water, broad beamed, bound by its hawser and anchored fast. boar shapes flashed above their cheek guards, the brightly forged work of goldsmiths, watching over those stern-faced men. they marched in step, hurrying on till the timbered hall rose before them, radiant with gold. nobody on earth knew of another building like it. majesty lodged there, and its light shone over many lands. so their gallant escort guided them to that dazzling stronghold and indicated the shortest way to it; then the noble warrior wheeled on his horse and spoke these words it is time for me to go. may the almighty father keep you and in his kindness watch over your exploits. i’m away to the sea, back on alert against enemy raiders. it was a paved track, a path that kept them in marching order. their mail shirts glinted, hard and hand linked; the high gloss iron of their armor rang. so they duly arrived in their grim war gear at the hall, and, weary from the sea, stacked wide shields of the toughest hardwood against the wall, then collapsed on the benches; battledress and weapons clashed. they collected their spears in a seafarer’s stook, a stand of grayish tapering ash. and the troops themselves were as good as their  weapons. then a proud warrior questioned the men concerning their origins where do you come from, carrying these decorated shields and shirts of mail, these cheek hinged helmets and javelins? i am hrothgar’s herald and officer. i have never seen so impressive or large an assembly of strangers. stoutness of heart, bravery not banishment, must have brought you to hrothgar.  the man whose name was known for courage, the geat leader, resolute in his helmet, answered in return we are retainers from hygelac’s band. beowulf is my name. if your lord and master, the most renowned son of halfdane, will hear me out and graciously allow me to greet him in person, i am ready and willing to report my errand. wulfgar replied, a wendel chief renowned as a warrior, well known for his wisdom and the temper of his mind i will take this message, in accordance with your wish, to our noble king, our dear lord, friend of the danes, the giver of rings. i will go and ask him about your coming here, then hurry back with whatever reply it pleases him to give. with that he turned to where hrothgar sat, an old man among retainers; the valiant follower stood foursquare in front of his king he knew the courtesies. wulfgar addressed his dear lord people from geatland have put ashore. they have sailed far over the wide sea. they call the chief in charge of their band by the name of beowulf. they beg, my lord, an audience with you, exchange of words and formal greeting. most gracious hrothgar, do not refuse them, but grant them a reply. from their arms and appointment, they appear wellborn and worthy of respect, especially the one who has led them this far he is formidable indeed. hrothgar, protector of shieldings, replied i used to know him when i was a young boy. his father before him was called ecgtheow. hrethel the greath gave ecgtheow his daughter in marriage. this man is their son, here to follow up an old friendship. a crew of seamen who sailed for me once with a gift cargo across to geatland returned with marvelous tales about him a thane, they declared, with the strength of thirty in the grip of each hand. now holy god has, in his goodness, guided him here to the westdanes, to defend us from grendel. this is my hope; and for his heroism i will recompense him with a rich treasure. go immediately, bid him and the geats he has is attendance to  assemble and enter. say, moreover, when you speak to them, that they are welcome in denmark.  at the door of the hall, wulfgar duly delivered the message  my lord, the conquering king of the danes, bids me announce that he knows your ancestry; also that he welcomes you here to heorot and salutes your arrival from across the sea. you are free now to move forward to meet hrothgar, in helmets and armor, but shields must stay here and spears be stacked until the outcome of the audience is clear. the hero arose, surrounded closely by his powerful thanes. a party remained under orders to keep watch on the arms; the rest proceeded, lead by their prince under heorot’s roof. and standing on the hearth in webbed links that the smith had woven, the fine forged mesh of his gleaming mail shirt, resolute in his helmet, beowulf spoke greetings to hrothgar. i am hygelac’s kinsman, one of his hall troop. when i was younger, i had great triumphs. then news of grendel, hard to ignore, reached me at home sailors brought stories of the plight you suffer in this legendary hall, how it lies deserted, empty and useless once the evening light hides itself under heaven’s dome. so every elder and experience councilman among my people supported my resolve to come here to you, king hrothgar, because all knew of my awesome strength. they had seen me bolstered in the blood of enemies when i battled and bound five beasts, raided a troll nest and in the night sea slaughtered sea brutes. i have suffered extremes and avenged the geats (their enemies brought it upon themselves, i devastated them). now i mean to be a match for grendel, settle the outcome in a single combat.  and so, my request, o king of brightdanes, dear prince pf the shieldings, friend of the people and their ring of defense, my one request is that you won’t refuse me, who have come this far, the privilege of purifying heorot, with my own men to help me, and nobody else. i have heard moreover that the monster scorns in his reckless way to use weapons; therefore, to heighten hygelac’s fame and gladden his heart, i hereby renounce sword and the shelter of the broad shield, the heavy war board hand-to-hand is how it will be, a life and death fight with the fiend. whichever one death fells must deem it a just judgment by god. if grendel wins, it will be a gruesome day; he will glut himself on the geats in the war hall, swoop without fear on that flower of manhood as on others before. then my face won’t be there to be covered in death; he will carry me away as he goes to ground, gorged and bloodied; he will run gloating with my raw corpse and feed on it alone, in a cruel frenzy. no need then to lament for long or lay out my body if the battle takes me, send back this breast webbing that weland fashioned and hrethel gave me, to hygelac. fate goes ever as fate must. hrothgar, the helmet of the shieldings, spoke beowulf, my friend, you have traveled here to favor us with help and fight for us. there was a feud one time, begun by your father. with his own hands he had killed heatholaf, who was a wulfing; so war was looming and his people, in fear of it, forced him to leave. he came away then over rolling waves to the south danes here, the sons of honor. i was then in the full flush of kingship, establishing my sway over all the rich strongholds of this heroic land. heorogar, my older brother and the better man, also a son of halfdane’s, had died. finally i healed the feud by paying i shipped a treasure trove to the wulfings and ecgtheow acknowledged me with oaths of allegiance.  it bothers me to have to burden anyone with all the grief grendel has caused and the havoc he has wreaked upon us in heorot, our  humiliations. my household guard are on the wane, fate sweeps them away into grendel’s clutches but god can easily halt these raids and harrowing attacks! time and again, when the goblets passed and seasoned fighters got flushed with beer they would pledge themselves to protect heorot and wait for grendel with whetted swords. but when dawn broke and day crept in over each empty, blood-spattered bench, the floor of the mead hall where they had feasted would be slick with slaughter. and so they died, faithful retainers, and my following dwindled. now take your place at the table, relish the triumph of heroes to your heart’s content. then a bench was cleared in that banquet hall so the geats could have room to be together  and the party sat, proud in their bearing, strong and stalwart. an attendant stood by with a decorated pitcher, pouring bright helpings of mead. and the minstrel sang, filling heorot with his head clearing voice, gladdening that great rally of danes and geats. from where he crouched at the king’s feet, unferth, a son of ecglaf’s, spoke contrary words. beowulf’s coming, his sea braving, made him sick with envy he could not brook or abide the fact that anyone else alive under heaven might enjoy greater regard than he did are you the beowulf who took on breca in a swimming match on the open sea, risking the water just to prove you could win? it was sheer vanity made you venture out on the main deep. and no matter who tried, friend or foe, to deflect the pair of you, neither would back down the seatest obsessed you. you waded in, embracing water, taking its measure, mastering currents, riding on the swell. the ocean swayed, winter went wild in the waves, but you vied for seven nights; and then he outswam you, came ashore the stronger contender. he was cast up safe and sound one morning among the heathoreams, then made his way  to where he belonged in bronding country, home again, sure of his ground in strong room and bawn. so breca made good his boast upon you and was proved right. no matter, therefore, how you may have fared in every bout and battle until now, this time you’ll be worsted;; no one has ever outlasted an entire night against grendel. beowulf, ecgtheow’s son, replied well, friend unferth, you have had your say  about breca and me. but it was mostly beer that was doing the talking. the truth is this when the going was heavy in those high waves, i was the strongest swimmer of all. we’d been children together and we grew up daring ourselves to outdo each other, boasting and urging each other to risk our lives on the sea. and so it turned out. each of us swam holding a sword, a naked, hard proofed blade for protection against the whale beasts. but breca could never move out farther or faster from me than i could manage to move from him. shoulder to shoulder, we struggled on for five nights, until the long flow and pitch of the waves, the perishing cold, night falling and winds from the north drove us apart. the deep boiled up and its wallowing sent the  sea brutes wild. my armor held me to hold out; my hard ringed chainmail, hand forged and linked, a fine, closefitting filigree of gold, kept me safe when some ocean creature pulled me to the bottom. pinioned fast and swathed in its grip, i was granted one final chance my sword plunged and the ordeal was over. through my own hands the fury of battle had finished off the sea beast. time and again, foul things attacked me, lurking and stalking, but i lashed out, gave as good as i got with my sword. my flesh was not for feasting on, there would be no monsters gnawing and gloating over their banquet at the bottom of the sea. instead, in the morning, mangled and sleeping the sleep of the sword, they slopped and floated like the ocean’s leavings. from now on sailors would the safe, the deep sea raids were over for good. light came from the east, bright guarantee of god, and the waves  went quiet; i could see the headlands and buffeted cliffs. often, for undaunted courage, fate spares the man it has not already marked. however it had occurred, my sword had killed nine sea monsters. such night dangers and hard ordeals i have never heard of nor of a man so desolate in surging waves. but worn out as i was, i survived, came through with my life. the ocean lifted and laid me ashore, i landed safe on the coast of finland. now, i cannot recall any fight you entered, unferth, that bears comparison. i don’t boast when i say that neither you nor breca ever were much celebrated for swordsmanship or for facing danger in the battlefield. you killed your own kith and kin, so for all your cleverness and quick tongue, you will suffer damnation in the pits of hell. the fact it, unferth, if you were truly  as keen or courageous as you claim to be grendel would never have got away with such unchecked atrocity, attacks on your king,  havoc in heorot and horrors everywhere. but he knows he need never be in dread of your blade making a fizzle of his blood or of vengeance arriving ever from this quarter from the victoryshieldings, the shoulders of the spear. he knows he can trample down you danes to his heart’s content,  humiliate and murder without fear of reprisal. but he will find me different. i will show him how geats shape to kill in the heat of battle. then whoever wants to may go bravely to morning mead, when morning light, scarfed in sun dazzle, shines forth from the south and brings another daybreak to the world. then the gray-haired treasure giver was glad; farfamed in battle, the prince of brightdanes and keeper of his people counted on beowulf, on the warrior’s steadfastness and his word. so the laughter started, the din got louder and the crowd was happy. wealhtheow came in, hrothgar’s queen, observing the courtesies. adorned in her gold, she graciously saluted the men in the hall, then handed the cup first to hrothgar, their homeland’s guardian, urging him to drink deep and enjoy it,because he was dear to them. and he drank it down like the warlord he was, with festive cheer. so the helming woman went on her rounds, queenly and dignified, decked out in rings, offering the goblet to all ranks, treating the household and the assembled troop until it was beowulf’s turn to take it from her hand. with measured words she welcomed the geat and thanked god for granting her wish that a deliverer she could believe in would arrive  to ease their afflictions. he accepted the cup, a daunting man, dangerous in action and eager for it always. he addressed wealhtheow; beowulf, son of ecgtheow, said i had a fixed purpose when i put out to sea. as i sat in the boat with my band of men, i meant to perform to the uttermost what your people wanted or perish in the attempt, in the fiend’s clutches. and i shall fulfill that purpose, prove myself with a proud deed or meet my death here in the meadhall. this formal boast by beowulf the geatpleased the lady well and she went to sit by hrothgar, regal and  arrayed with gold. then it was like old times in the echoing hall, proud talk and the people happy, loud and excited; until soon enoughhalfdane’s heir had to be away to his night’s rest. he realizedthat the demon was going to descend on the hall that he had plotted all day, from dawnlight until darkness gathered again over the worldand stealthy nightshades came stealing forth under the cloudmurk. the company stood as the two leaders took leave of each other hrothgar wished beowulf health and good luck, named him hallwarden and announced as follows never, since my hand could hold a shield have i entrusted or given control of the dane’s hall to anyone but you. ward and guard it, for it is the greatest of houses. be on your mettle now, keep in mind your fame,  beware of the enemy. there’s nothing you wish for that won’t be yours if you win through alive. hrothgar departed then with his houseguard. the lord of the shieldings, their shelter in war, left the meadhall to lie with wealhtheow, his queen and bedmate. the king of glory (as people learned) had posted a lookoutwho was a match for grendel, a guard against monsters, special protection to the danish prince.and the geat placed complete trustin his strength of limb and the lord’s favor.ordering him to keep the equipment guarded. and before he bedded down, beowulf,that prince of goodness, proudly asserted  when it comes to fighting, i count myselfas dangerous any day as grendel.so it won’t be a cutting edge i’ll wield  to mow him down, easily as i might. he has no ideas of the arts of war,of shield or swordplay, though he does possess  a wild strength. no weapons, therefore,for either this night unarmed he shall face me if face me he dares. and may the divine lord  in his wisdom grant victoryto whichever side he sees fit.  then down the brave man lay with his bolster under his head and his whole companyof searovers at rest beside him. none of them expected he would ever seehis homeland again or get back   to his native place and the people who reared him. they knew too well the way it was before,how often the danes had fallen preyto death in the meadhall. but the lord was weaving a victory on his warloom for the weathergeats.through the strength of one they all prevailed; they would crush their enemy and come throughin triumph and gladness. the truth is clearalmighty god rules over mankind and always has.then out of the nightcame the shadowstalker, stealthy and swift; the hallguards were slack, asleep at their posts, all except one; it was widely understoodthat as long as god disallowed it,the fiend could not bear them to his shadowbourne. one man, however, was in a fighting mood,awake and on edge, spoiling for action.in off the moors, down through the mistbands     godcursed grendel came greedily loping. the bane of the race of men roamed forth, hunting for a prey in the high hall.under the cloudmurk he moved towards it until it shone above him, a sheer keepof fortified gold. nor was that the first timehe had scouted the grounds of hrothgar’s dwelling although never in his life, before or since,did he find harder fortune or halldefenders.spurned and joyless, he journeyed on ahead and arrived at the bawn. the ironbraced door turned in its hinge when his hand touched it.then his rage boiled over, he ripped openthe mouth of the building, maddening for blood, pacing the length of the patterned floor with his loathsome tread, while a baleful light, flame more than light, flared from his eyes.he saw many men in the mansion, sleeping, a ranked company of kinsmen and warriorsquartered together. and his glee was demonic, picturing the mayhem before morninghe would rip life from limp and devour them, feed on their flesh but his fate that night was due to change, his days of raveninghad come to an end.mighty and canny,hygelac’s kinsman was keenly watching for the first move the monster would make. nor did the creature keep him waitingbut struck suddenly and started in;he grabbed and mauled a man on his bench, bit into his bonelappings, bolted down his blood and gorged on him in lumps, leaving the body utterly lifeless, eaten uphand and foot. venturing closer,his talon was raised to attack beowulf where he lay on the bed; he was bearing in with open claw when the alert hero’scomeback and armlock forestalled him utterly. the captain of evil discovered himselfin a handgrip harder than anything he had ever encountered in any manon the face of the earth. every bone in his body quailed and coiled, but he could not escape.he was desperate to flee to his den and hidewith the devil’s litter, for in all his dayshe had never been clamped or cornered like this.then hygelac’s trusty retainer recalledhis bedtime speech, sprang to his feetand got a firm hold. fingers were bursting, the monster backtracking, the man overpowering. the dread of the land was desperate to escape, to take a roundabout road and fleeto his lair in the fens. the latching power in his fingers weakened; it was the worst trip the terrormonger had taken to heorot.and now the timber trembled and sang, a hallsession that harrowed every dane inside the stockade stumbling in fury,the two contenders crashed through the building.the hall clattered and hammered, but somehow survived the onslaught and kept standingit was handsomely structured, a sturdy frame braced with the best of blacksmith’s work inside and out. the story goesthat as the pair struggled, mead benches were smashed and sprung off the floor, gold fittings and all.before then, no shielding elder would believe there was any power or person on earth capable of wrecking their hornrigged hallunless the burning embrace of fire engulf it in flame. then an extraordinary wail arose, and bewildering fearcame over the danes. everyone felt itwho heard that cry as it echoed off the wall,a godcursed scream and strain of catastrophe, the howl of the loser, the lament of the hellserf keening his wound. he was overwhelmed, manacled tight by the man who of all menwas foremost and strongest in the days of this life.but the earl troop’s leader was not inclined to allow his caller to depart alivehe did not consider that life of much account to anyone anywhere. time and again, beowulf’s warriors worked to defend their lord’s life, laying about themas best they could with their ancestral blades. stalwart in action, they kept striking outon every side, seeking to cutstraight to the soul. when they joined the strugglethere was something they could have not known at the time, that not blade on earth, no blacksmith’s artcould ever damage their demon opponent.he had conjured the harm from the cutting edge of every weapon. but his going awayout of the world and the days of his life would be agony to him, and his alien spirit would travel far into fiends’ keeping.then he who had harrowed the hearts of men with pain and affliction in former timesand had given offense also to god found that his bodily powers had failed him. hygelac’s kinsman kept him helplessly locked in a handgrip. as long as either livedhe was hateful to the other. the monster’s wholebody was in pain, a tremendous wound appeared on his shoulder. sinews splitand the bonelappings burst. beowulf was granted the glory of winning; grendel was drivenunder the fen banks, fatally hurt,to his desolate lair. his days were numbered, the end of his life was coming over him, he knew it for certain; and one bloody clashhad fulfilled the dearest wishes of the danes. the man who had lately landed among them, proud and sure, had purged the hall,kept it from harm; he was happy with his nightwork and the courage he had shown. the geat captain had boldly fulfilled his boast to the danes he had healed and relieved a huge distress,unremitting humiliations, the hard fate they’d been forced to undergo, no small affliction. clear proof of this could be seen in the hand the hero displayedhigh up near the roof the whole of grendel’sshoulder and arm, his awesome grasp.then morning came and many a warrior gathered, as i have heard, around the gifthall, clanchiefs flocking from far and neardown wideranging roads, wondering greatlyat the monster’s footprint. his fatal departure was regretted by no one who witnessed his trail, the ignominious marks of his flightwhere he’d sulked away, exhausted in spirit and beaten in battle, bloodying the path, hauling his doom to the demons’ mere.the bloodshot water wallowed and surged,there were loathsome up throws and over turnings of waves and gore and wouldslurry.with his death upon him, he had dived deepinto his marsh den, drowned out his life and his heathen soul hell claimed him there.then away they rode, the old retainers with many a young man following after, a troop on horseback, in high spiritson their bay steeds. beowulf’s doingswere praised over and over again. nowhere, they said, north or south between the two seas or under the tall sky on the broad earth was there anyone betterto raise a shield or to rule a kingdom.  yet there was no laying of blame on their lord, the noble hrothgar; he was a good king.at times the warband broke into a gallop, letting their chestnut horses race wherever they found the going goodon those wellknown tracks. meanwhile, a thaneof the king’s household, a carrier of tales, a traditional singer deeply schooledin the lore of the past, linked a new themeto a strict metre. the man started to recite with skill, rehearsing beowulf’s triumphs and feats in wellfashioned lines, entwining his words.he told what he’d heard repeated in songs of sigemund’s exploits, all of those many feats and marvels,the struggles and wanderings of wael’s son,things unknown to anyone,except fitela, feuds and foul doings confided from uncle to nephew when he feltthe urge to speak of them always had they been partners in the fight, friends in need.they killed giants, their conquering swords had brought them down.after his deathsigemund’s glory grew and grewbecause of his courage when he killed the dragon, the guardian of the hoard. under gray stonehe had dared to enter all by himself to face the worst without fitela.but nit came to pass that his sword plungedright through those radiant scales and drove into the wall. the dragon died of it. his daring had given him  total possession of the treasure hoard , his to dispose of however he liked. he loaded a boatwael’s son weighted her holdwith dazzling spoils. the hot dragon melted.sigemund’s name was known everywhere. he was utterly valiant and venturesome,a fence round his fighters and flourished thereforeafter king heremond’s prowess declined and his campaigns slowed down. the king was betrayed, ambushed in jutland, overpoweredand done away with.  the waves of his grief had beaten him down,  made him a burden, a source of anxiety  to his own noblesthat expedition  was often condemnedto those earlier times by experienced men, men who relied  on his lordship for redress,who presumed that the part of a prince was to thrive on his father’s throne and protect the nation, the shielding land where they lived and belonged, its holdings and strongholds. such was beowulfin the affection of his friends and of everyone alive. but evil entered into heremod.meanwhile, the dane kept racing their mounts down sandy lanes. the light of daybroke and kept brightening. bands of retainers galloped in excitement to the gabled hallto see the marvel; and the king himself,guardian of the ringhoard, goodness in person, walked in majesty from the women’s quarters with a numerous train, attended by his queen and her crowd of maidens, across the meadhall. when hrothgar arrived at the hall, he spoke, standing on the steps, under the steep eaves, gazing at the roofwork and grendel’s talon first and foremost, let the almighty father be thanked for this sight. i suffered a longharrowing by grendel. but the heavenly shepherdcan work his wonders always and everywhere. not long since, it seemed i would never be granted the slightest solace or relieffrom any of my burdens the best of houses glittered and reeked and ran with blood.this one worry outweighed all othersa constant distress to counselors entrustedwith defending the people’s forts from assault by monsters and demons. but now a man,with the lord’s assistance, has accomplished somethingnone of us could manage before now for all our efforts. whoever she waswho brought forth this flower of manhood, if she is still alive, that woman can say that in her labor the lord of agesbestowed a grace on her. so now, beowulf, adopt you in my heart as a dear son.nourish and maintain this new connection,you noblest of men;; there’ll be nothing you want for,no worldly good that won’t be yours.i have often honored smaller achievements, recognized warriors not nearly as worthy, lavished rewards on the less deserving.but you have made yourself immortalby your glorious action. may the lord of ages continue to keep and requite you well.beowulf, son of ecgtheow, spokewe have gone through a glorious endeavor and been much favored in this fight we dared against the unknown. nevertheless,if you could have seen the monster himself where he lay beaten, i would have been better pleased. my plan was to pounce, pin him downin a tight grip and grapple him to deathhave him panting for life, powerless and clasped in my bare hands, his body in thrall.but i couldn’t stop him from slipping my hold. the lord allowed it, my lock on himwasn’t strong enough, he struggled fiercelyand broke and ran. yet he bought his freedomat a high price, for he left his hand and arm and shoulder to show he had been here, a cold comfort for having come among us.and now he won’t be long for this world.he has done his worst but the wound will end him. he is hasped and hooped and hirpling with pain, limped and looped in it. like a man outlawed for wickedness, he mush awaitthe mighty judgment of god in majesty.there was less tampering and big talk thenfrom unferth the boaster, less of his blather as the hallthanes eyed the awful proof of the hero’s prowess, the splayed hand up under the eaves. every nail,clawscale and spur, every spikeand welt on the hand of that heathen brute was like barbed steel. everybody said there was no honed iron hard enoughto pierce him through, no timeproofed blade that could cut his brutal, bloodcaked claw.then the order was given for all hands  to help refurbish heorot immediatelymen and women thronging the winehall, getting it ready. gold thread shonein the wallhangings, woven scenesthat attracted and held the eye’s attention. but ironbraced as the inside of it had been, the bright room lay in ruins now.the very doors had been dragged from their hinges. only the roof remained unscathedby the time the guiltfouled fiend turned tail in despair of his life. but death is not easily escaped from by anyoneall of us with souls, earthdwellersand children of men, must make our way to a destination already ordainedwhere the body, after the banqueting, sleeps on its deathbed.then the due time arrivedfor halfdane’s son to proceed to the hall.the king himself would sit down to feast.no group ever gathered in greater numbers or better order around their ringgiver. the benches filled with famous men who fell to with relish; round upon roundof mead was passed; those powerful kinsmen, hrothgar and hrothulf, were in high spiritsin the raftered hall. inside heorotthere was nothing but friendship. the shielding nation was not yet familiar with feud and betrayal.then halfdane’s son presented beowulfwith gold standards as a victory gift, an embroidered banner; also breastmail and a helmet; and a sword carried high,that was both precious object and a token of honor. so beowulf drank his drink, at ease; it was hardly a shame to be showered with such gifts in front of the halltroops. there haven’t been many moments, i am sure, when men have exchanged four such treasures at so friendly a sitting.an embossed ring, a band lapped with wirearched over the helmet headprotection to keep the keenground cutting edge from damaging it when danger threatened and the man was battling behind his shield. next the king ordered eight horseswith gold bridles to be brought through the yard into the hall. the harness of oneincluded a saddle of sumptuous design, the battleseat where the son of halfdanerode when he wished to join the swordplaywherever the killing and carnage were the worst, he would be to the fore, fighting hard. the danish prince, descendent of ing, handed over both the arms and the horses, urging beowulf to use them well.and so their leader, the lord and guardof coffer and strong room, with customary grace bestowed upon beowulf both sets of gifts.a fair witness can see how well each one behaved.the chieftain went on to reward the otherseach man on the bench who had sailed with beowulf and risked the voyage received a bounty,some treasured possession. and compensation, a price in gold, was settled for the geat grendel had killed cruelly earlieras he would have killed more, had not mindful godand one man’s daring prevented that doom. past and present, god’s will prevails.hence, understanding is always best and a prudent mind. whoever remainsfor long here in this earthly life will enjoy and endure more than enough.they sang then and played to please the hero, words and music for their warrior prince, harp tunes and tales of adventurethere were high times on the hall benchesand the king’s poet performed his partwith the saga of finn and his sons, unfolding the tale of the fierce attack in friesland where hnaef, king of the danes, met death.hildeburh had little cause to credit the jutesson and brother, she lost them bothon the battlefield.she, bereftand blameless, they foredoomed, cut downand speargored. she, the woman in shock,waylaid by grief,hoc’s daughterhow could she not lament her fatewhen morning came and the light brokeon her murdered dears?and so farewelldelight on earth,war carried away finn’s troop of thanes, all but a few.how then could finn hold the lineor fight onto the end with hengest,how save the rump of his forcefrom that enemy chief?so a truce was offeredas follows first separate quartersto be cleared for the danes, hall and throneto be shared with the frisians.then, second ;every day at the doleout of giftsfinn, son of focwald,should honor the danes, bestow with an even hand to hengestand hengest’s menthe wroughtgold rings,bounty to match the measure he gavehis own frisians to keep moralein the beerhall high.both sides thensealed their agreement.with oaths to hengestfinn swore openly, solemnly,that the battle survivors would be guaranteedhonor and status.no infringementby word or deed,no provocation would be permitted.their own ringgiverafter all was dead and gone,they were leaderless in forced allegianceto his murderer.so if any frisianstirred up bad blood with insinuationsor taunts about this, the blade of the swordwill arbitrate it.a funeral pyrewas then prepared, effulgent goldbrought out from the hoard.the pride and princeof the shieldings layawaiting the flame. everywhere there were bloodplasteredcoats of mail.the pyre was heapedwith boarshaped helmets forged in gold,with the gashed corpses of wellborn danesmany had fallen.then hildeburh ordered her ownson’s bodybe burnt with hnaef’s,the flesh on his bonesto sputter and blazebeside his uncle’s.the woman wailed and sang keens,the warrior went up.carcass flame swirled and fumed, they stood round the burialmound and howled as heads melted,crusted gashes spattered and ranbloody matter.the glutton elementflamed and consumed the dead of both sides.their great days were gone.warriors scatteredto homes and forts all over friesland,fewer now, feeling loss of friends.hengest stayed, lived out that wholeresentful, bloodsullenwinter with finn, homesick and helpless.no ringwhorled prowcould up then and away on the sea.wind and water raged with storms,wave and shingle were shackled on iceuntil another year appeared in the yardas it does to this day, the seasons constant,the wonder of light coming over us.then winter was gone,earth’s lap grew lovely,longing woke in the coopedup exilefor a voyage homebut more for vengeance, some way of bringing things to a headhis sword arm hankered to greet the jutes.so he did not balk once hunlafingplaced on his lap dazlethe duel,the best sword of all, whose edges jutesknew only too well.thus blood was spilled,the gallant finn slain in his homeafter guthlaf and oslaf back from their voyagemade old accusation the brutal ambush,the fate they had suffered,all blamed on finn.  the wildness in them had to brim over.the hall ran red with blood of enemies.finn was cut down, the queen brought awayand everything the shieldings could findinside finn’s walls the frisian king’sgold collars and gemstones swept off to the ship.over sealanes then back to danelandthe warrior troop bore that lady home.the poem was over,the poet had performed, a pleasant murmurstarted on the benches, stewards did the rounds with wine in splendid jugs, and wilhtheow came to sit in her gold crown between two good men,uncle and nephew, each of whomstill trusted the other; and the forthright unferth, admired by all for his mind and courage although under a cloud for killing his brothers, reclined near the king.the queen spokeenjoy this drink, my most generous lord;;raise up your goblet, entertain the geatsduly and gently, discourse with them, be openhanded, happy and fond.relish their company, but recollect as wellall of the boons that have been bestowed upon you. the bright court of heorot has been cleansedand now the word is that you want to adopt this warrior as a son. so, while you may, bask in your fortune, then bequeath kingdom and nation to your kith and kin,before your decease. i am certain of hrothulf.he is noble and will use the young ones well. he will not let you down. should you die before him, he will treat our children truly and fairly.he will honor, i am sure, our two sons, repay them in kind when he recollects all the good things we gave him once,the favor and respect he found in childhood.she turned then to the bench where her boys sat, hrethric and hrothmond, with other nobles’ sons, all the youth together; and that good man,beowulf the geat, sat between the brothers. the cup was carried to him, kind wordsspoken in welcome and wealth of wrought gold graciously bestowed; two arm bangles,a mail shirt and rings, and the most resplendent torque of gold i have ever heard tell of anywhere on earth or under heaven.there was no hoard like it since hama snatched the brosings’ neckchain and bore it away with its gems and settings to his shinning fort,away from eormenric’s wiles and hatred, and thereby ensured his eternal reward. hygelac the geat, grandson of swerting, wore this neckring on his last raid;at bay under his banner, he defended the booty, treasure he had won. fate swept him away because of his proud need to provokea feud with the frisians. he fell beneath his shield, in the same gemcrusted , kingly gear he had worn when he crossed the frothing wavevat.so the dead king fell into frankish hands. hey took his breastmail, also his necktorque, and punier warriors plundered the slainwhen the carnage ended; geat corpses covered the field.applause filled the hall.then wealhtheow pronounce in the presence of the companytake delight in this torque, dear beowulf,wear it for luck and also wear this mailfrom our people’s armory may you prosper in them! be acclaimed or strength, for kindly guidanceto these two boys, and your bounty will be sure. you have won renown you are known to all men far and near, now and forever.your sway is wide and the wind’s home, as the sea around cliffs. so, my prince, i wish you a lifetime’s luck and blessings to enjoy this treasure. treat my sons with tender care, be strong and kind.here each comrade is true to the other, loyal to lord, loving in spirit.the thanes have one purpose, the people are ready having drunk and pledged, the ranks do as i bid.she moved then to her place. men were drinking wine at that rare feast; how could they know fate,the grim shape of things to come, the threat looming over many thanesas night approached and king hrothgar preparedto retire to his quarters? retainers in great numbers were posted on guard as so often in the past.benches were pushed back, bedding gear and bolsters spread across the floor, and one man  lay down to his rest, already marked for death. at their heads they placed their polished timber battleshields; and on the bench above them,each man’s kit was kept to handa towering warhelmet, webbed mailshirt and greatshafted spear. it was their habit always and everywhere to be ready for action, at home or in the camp, in whatever caseand at whatever time the need aroseto rally round their lord. they were a right people. they went to sleep. and one paid dearlyfor his night’s ease, as had happened to them often, ever since grendel occupied the goldhall, committing evil until the end came,death after his crimes. then it became clear, obvious to everyone once the fight was over, that an avenger lurked and was still alive, grimly biding time. grendel’s mother, monstrous hellbride, brooded on her wrongs.she had been forced down into fearful waters, the cold depths, after cain had killedhis father’s son, felled his ownbrother with the sword. banished an outlaw,marked by having murdered, he moved into the wilds, shunning company and joy. and from cain there sprang misbegotten spirits, among them grendel,the banished and accursed, due to come to grips with that watcher in heorot waiting to do battle. the monster wrenched and wrestled with himbu beowulf was mindful of his mighty strength, the wondrous gifts god had showered on him he relied for help on the lord of all,on his care and favor. so he overcame the foe, brought down the hellbrute. broken and bowed, outcast from all sweetness, the enemy of mankindmade for his deathden. but now his mother had sallied forth on a savage journey,griefracked and ravenous, desperate for revenge.  she came to heorot. there, inside the hall, danes lay asleep, earls who would soon endure  a great reversal once grendel’s mother  attacked and entered. her onslaught was lessonly by as much as an amazon warrior’s in less than an armored man’s  when the hefted sword, its hammered edge and gleaming blade slathered in blood, razes the sturdy boarridge off a helmet.then in the hall, hardhoned swords  were grabbed from the bench, many a broad shieldlifted and braced; there was little thought of helmets  or woven mail when they woke in terror.  the helldam was in panic, desperate to get out, in mortal terror the moment she was found.  she had pounced and taken one of the retainers in a tight hold, then headed for the fen.to hrothgar, this man was the most beloved  of the friends he trusted between the two seas. she had done away with a great warrior,ambushed him at rest.  beowulf was elsewhere.earlier, after the reward of the treasure,  the geat had been given another lodging.  there was an uproar in heorot. she had snatched their trophy,grendel’s bloodied hand. it was a fresh blow to the afflicted bawn. the bargain was hard, both parties having to paywith the lives of friends. and the old lord, the grayhaired warrior, was heartsore and weary when he heard the news his highestplaced advisor, his dearest companion, was dead and gone.beowulf was quickly brought to the chamber the winner of fights, the archwarrior, came firstfooting in with his fellow troops to where the king in his wisdom waited, still wondering whether almighty god would even turn the tide of his misfortunes.so beowulf entered with his band in attendance and the wooden floorboards banged and rang as he advance, hurrying to addressthe prince of the ingwins, asking if he’d restedsince the urgent summons had come as a surprise. then hrothgar, the shieldings’ helmet, spoke rest? what is rest? sorrow has returned.alas for the danes! aeschere is dead.he was yrmenlaf’s elder brother and a soul mate to me, a true mentor,my righthand man when the ranks clashed and our boarcrests had to take a batteringin the line of action. aechere was everything the world admires in a wise man and a friend.then this roaming killer came in a fury and slaughtered him in heorot. where she is hiding, glutting on the corpse and glorying in her escape,i cannot tell; she has taken up the feudbecause of last night, when you killed grendel, wrestled and racked him in ruinous combat since for too long he had terrorized uswith his depredations. he died in battle, paid with his life; and now this powerful other one arrives, this force for evildriven to avenge her kinsman’s death.  or so it seems to thanes in their grief, in the anguish every thane enduresat the loss of a ringgiver, now that the hand that bestowed so richly has been stilled in death.i have heard it said by my people in hall, counselors who live in the upland country, that they have seen two such creatures prowling the moors, huge maraudersfrom some other world. one of these things,as far as anyone ever can discern, looks like a woman; the other, warpedin the shape of a man, moves beyond the pale bigger than any man, an unnatural birth called grendel by country peoplein former days. they are fatherless creatures, and their whole ancestry is hidden in a past of demons and ghosts. they dwell apart among wolves on hills, on windswept crags and treacherous keshes, where cold streamspour down the mountain and disappear under mist and moorland.a few miles from herea froststiffened wood waits and keeps watch above a mere; the overhanging bankis a maze of tree roots mirrored in its surface. at night there, something uncanny happens the water burns. and the mere bottomhas never been sounded by the sons of men. on its bank, the heatherstepper haltsthe hart in flight from pursuing houndswill turn to face them with firmset horns and die in the wood rather than dive beneath its surface. that is no good place. when the wind blows up and stormy weather makes clouds scud and the skies weep, out of its depths a dirty surgeis pitched towards the heavens. now help depends again on you and you alone.the gap of danger where the demon waits is still unknown to you. seek it if you dare.i will compensate you for settling the feud as i did last time with lavish wealth,coffers of coiled gold, if you come back.beowulf, son of ecgtheow, spokewise sir, do not grieve. it is always betterto avenge dear ones than to indulge in mourning. for every one of us, living in this worldmeans waiting for our end. let whoever can win glory before death. when a warrior is gone, that will be his best and only bulwark.so arise, my lord, and let us immediately set forth on the trail of this trolldam. i guarantee you she will not get away,not to dens underground nor upland grovesnor the ocean floor. she’ll have nowhere to flee to.endure your troubles today. bear upand be the man i expect you to be.with that the old lord sprung to his feetand praised god for beowulf’s pledge.then a bit and halter were brought for his horsewith the plaited mane. the wise king mounted the royal saddle and rode out in stylewith a force of shieldbearers. the forest paths were marked all over with the monster’s tracks, her trail on the ground wherever she had gone across the dark moors, dragging awaythe body of that thane, hrothgar’s best counselor and overseer of the country.so the noble prince proceeded undismayed up fells and screes, along narrow footpathsand ways where they were forced into single file, ledges on cliffs above lairs of watermonsters. he went in front with a few men,good judges of the lie of the land,and suddenly discovered the dismal wood, mountain trees growing out at an angle above gray stones the bloodshot water surged underneath. it was a sore blowto all of the danes, friends of the shieldings, a hurt to each and every oneof that noble company when they came upon aechere’s head at the foot of the cliff.everybody gazed as the hot gorekept wallowing up and an urgent warhorn repeated its notes the whole partysat down to watch. the water was infestedwith all kinds of reptiles. there were writhing seadragons and monsters slouching on slopes by the cliff,serpents and wild things such as those that often surface at dawn to roam the sailroadand doom the voyage. down they plunged, lashing in anger at the loud callof the battle bugle. an arrow from the bow of the geat chief got one of themas he surged to the surface the seasoned shaft stuck deep in his flank and his freedom in the water got less and less. it was his last swim.he was swiftly overwhelmed in the shallows, prodded by barbed boarspears,cornered, beaten, pulled up on the bank,a strange lakebirth, a loathsome catch  men gazed at in awe.beowulf got ready,donned his wargear, indifferent to death;his mighty, handforged, finewebbed mail would soon meet with the menace under water. it would keep the bonecage of his body safeno enemy’s clasp could crush him in it,no vicious arm lock choke his life out. to guard his head he had a glittering helmet that was due to be muddied on the mere bottomand blurred in the up swirl. it was of beaten gold,  princely headgear hooped and haspedby a weaponsmith who had worked wondersin days gone by and adorned it with boarshapes; since then it had resisted every sword.  and another item lent by unferthat that moment was of no small importance the brehon handed him a hilted weapon,  a rare and ancient sword named hrunting. the iron blade with its illboding patternshad been tempered in blood. it had never failed  the hand of anyone who had hefted it in battle, anyone who had fought and faced the worstin the gap of danger. this was not the first time  it had been called to perform heroic feats.  when he lent that blade to the better swordsman,  unferth, the strongbuilt son of ecglaf,could hardly have remember the ranting speech he had made in his cups. he was not man enough  to face the turmoil of a fight under waterand the risk to his life. so there he lost  fame and repute. it was different for the other  rigged out in his gear, ready to do battle.   beowulf, son of ecgtheow, spokewisest of kings, now that i have cometo the point of action, i ask you to recallwhat we said earlier that you, son of halfdaneand goldfriend to retainers, that you, if i should fall and suffer death while serving your cause,would act like a father to me afterwards.if this combat kills me, take care of my young company, my comrades in arms. and be sure also, my beloved hrothgar,to send hygelac the treasures i received. let the lord of the geats gaze on that gold, let hrethel’s son take note of it and seethat i found a ringgiver of rare magnificence and enjoyed the good of his generosity.and unferth is to have what i inheritedto that farfamed man i bequeath my ownsharphorned, wavesheened wonder blade. with hrunting i shall gain glory or die.after these words, the prince of the weathergeats was impatient to be away and plunged suddenly without more ado, he dived in to the heaving depths of the lake. it was the best part of a day before he could see the solid bottom.quickly the one who haunted those waters,who had scavenged and gone her gluttonous rounds for a hundred seasons, sensed a humanobserving her outlandish lair from above. so she lunged and clutched and managed to catch him in her brutal grip; but his body, for all that,remained unscathed the mesh of the chainmail saved him on the outside. her savage talons failed to rip the web of his war shirt.then once she touched bottom, the wolfish swimmer carried the ringmailed prince to her court so that for all his courage he could never usethe weapons he carried; and a bewildering hordecame at him from the depths, droves of seabeasts who attacked with tusks and tore at his chainmail in a ghastly onslaught. the gallant mancould see he had entered some hellish turnhole and yet the water did not work against him because the hallroofing held offthe force of the current; then he saw firelight, a gleam and flareup, a glimmer of brightness.the hero observed that swampthing from hell, the tarnhag in all her terrible strength,then heaved his warsword and swung his arm the decorated blade came down ringing and singing on her head. but he soon foundhis battletorch extinguished the shinning blade refused to bite. it spared her and failedthe man in his need. it had gone through many handtohand fights, had hewed the armorand helmets of the doomed, but here at last the fabulous powers of that heirloom failed. hygelac’s kinsman kept thinking abouthis name and fame he never lost heart. then, in fury, he flung his sword away.the keen, inlaid, wormloopedpatterned steel was hurled to the ground he would have to rely on the might of his arm. so must a man do who intends to gain enduring gloryin a combat. life doesn’t cost him thought.then the prince of wargeats, warming to his fightwith grendel’s mother, gripped her shoulder and laid about him in a battle frenzyhe pitched his killer opponent to the floor  but she rose quickly and retaliated, grappled him tightly in her grim embrace. the surefooted fight fell daunted,the strongest of warriors stumbled and fell. so she pounced upon him and pulled outa broad, whetted knife now she could avenge her only child. but the mesh of chainmail on beowulf’s shoulder shielded his life, turned the edge and tip of the blade.the son of ecgtheow would surely have perished and the geats lost their warrior under the wide earth had the strong links and locks of his wargearnot helped to save him holy goddecided the victory. it was easy for the lord, the ruler of heaven, to redress the balance once beowulf got back up on his feet.then he saw a blade that boded well,a sword in her armory, an ancient heirloom from the days of the giants, an ideal weapon,one that any warrior would envy, but so huge and heavy in itselfonly beowulf could wield it in battle.so the shieldings’ hero, hardpressed and enraged, took a firm hold of the hilt and swungthe blade in an arc, a resolute blow that bit into her neck boneand severed it entirely, toppling the doomed house of her flesh; she fell to the floor.the sword dripped blood, the swordsman was elated.a light appeared and the place brightened the way the sky does when heaven’s candle is shinning clearly. he inspected the vault with sword held high, its hilt raised to guard and threaten, hygelac’s thane scouted by the wall in grendel’s wake. now the weapon was to prove its worth. the warrior determined to take revengefor every gross act grendel had committed and not only for that one occasionwhen he’d come to slaughter the sleeping troops, fifteen of hrothgar’s houseguardssurprised on their benches and ruthlessly devoured, and as many again carried away,a brutal plunderer. beowulf in his fury now settled that score he saw the monster in his resting place, warweary and wrecked, a lifeless corpse, a casualtyof the battle in heorot. the body gaped at the stroke dealt to it after deathbeowulf cut the corpse’s head off. immediately the counselors keeping a lookout with hrothgar, watching the lake water,saw a heaveup and surge of wavesand blood in the backwash. they bowed gray heads, spoke in their sage, experienced wayabout the good warrior, how they never again expected to see that prince returningin triumph to their king. it was clear to manythat the wolf of the deep had destroyed him forever.the ninth hour of the day arrived. the brave shieldings abandoned their clifftop and the king went home; but sick at heart, staring at the mere, the strangers held on.they wished, without hope, to behold their lord, beowulf himself.meanwhile, the sword began to wilt into gory icicles,to slather and thaw. it was a wonderful thing, the way it all melted as ice meltswhen the father eases the fetters off the frostand unravels the waterropes. he who wields power over time and tide he is the true lord.the geat captain saw treasure in abundance but carried no spoils from those quarters except for the head and the inlaid hilt embossed with jewels; its blade had meltedand the scrollwork on it burnt, so scalding was the blood of the poisonous fiend who had perished there.then away he swan, the one who had survived the fall of his enemies, flailing to the surface.the wide water, the waves and pools were no longer infested once the wandering fiend let go of her life and this unreliable world.the seafarers’ leader made for land, resolutely swimming, delighted with his prize, the mighty load he was lugging to the surface. his thanes advanced in a troop to meet him, thanking god and taking great delightin seeing their prince back safe and sound.quickly the hero’s helmet and mailshirtwere loosed and unlaced. the lake settled, clouds darkened above the bloodshot depths.with high hearts they headed awayalong footpath and trails through the fields, roads that they knew, each of them wrestlingwith the head they were carrying from the lakeside cliff, men kingly in their courage and capableof difficult work. it was a task for fourto hoist grendel’s head on a spear and bear it under strain to the bright hall.but soon enough they neared the place, fourteen geats in fine fettle, striding across the outlying groundin a delighted throng around they leader.in he came then, the thane’s commander,the archwarrior, to address hrothgarhis courage was proven, his glory was secure.grendel’s head was hauled by the hair,dragged across the floor where people were drinking, a horror for both queen and company to behold.they stared in awe. it was an astonishing sight. beowulf, son of ecgtheow, spokeso, son of halfdane, prince of the shieldings, we are glad to bring this booty from the lake. it is a token of triumph and we tender it to you. i barely survived the battle underwater.it was hardfought, a desperate affairthat could have gone badly; if god had not helped me, the outcome would have been quick and fatal.although hrunting is hardedged,i could never bring it to bear in battle. but the lord of men allowed me to behold for he often helps the unbefriendedan ancient sword shinning on the wall,a weapon made for giants, there for the wielding. then my moment came in the combat and i struck the dwellers in that den. next thing the damascened sword blade melted; it bloated and it burnedin their rushing blood. i have wrested the hiltfrom the enemies’ hand, avenged the evildone to the danes; it is what was due. and this i pledge, o prince of the shieldings you can sleep secure with your company of troops in heorot hall. never need you fearfor a single thane of your sept or nation, young warriors or old, that laying waste of life that you and your people endured of yore.then the gold hilt was handed over to the old lord, a relic from long agofor the venerable ruler. that rare smith workwas passed on to the prince of the danes when those devils perished; once death removed that murdering, guiltsteeped, godcursed fiend, eliminating his unholy lifeand his mother’s as well, it was willed that the kingwho of all the lavish giftlords of the north was the best regarded between the two seas.hrothgar spoke; he examined the hilt,that relic of old times. it was engraved all over and showed how war first came into the worldand the flood destroyed the tribe of giants. they suffered a terrible severance from the lord; the almighty made the waters rise,drowned them in the deluge for retribution. in pure gold inlay on the swordguards there were rune markings correctly incised, stating and recording for whom the sword had been first made and ornamentedwith its scrollwork hilt. then everyone hushed as the son of halfdane spoke his wisdom.a protector of his people, pledged to uphold truth and justice and to respect tradition, is entitled to affirm that this manwas born to distinction. beowulf, my friend, your fame has gone far and wide, you are known everywhere. in all things you are eventempered, prudent and resolute. so i stand firm by the promise of friendship we exchanged before. forever you will beyour people’s mainstay and your own warriors’helping hand.heremod was different,the way he behaved to ecgwala’s sons. his rise in the world brought little joyto the danish people, only death and destruction. he vented his rage on people he caroused with, killed his own comrades, a pariah kingwho cut himself off from his own kind, even though god almighty had made himeminent and powerful and marked him from the start for a happy life. but a change happened,he grew bloodthirsty, gave no more ringsto honor the danes. he suffered in the end for having plagued his people for so longhis life lost happiness.so learn from thisand understand true values. i who tell you have wintered into wisdom.it is a great wonderhow almighty god in his magnificence favors our race with rank and scopeand the gift of wisdom; his sway is wide. sometimes he allows the mind of a man of distinguished birth to follow its bent,grants him fulfillment and felicity on earth and forts to command in his own country. he permits him to lord it in many lands until the man in his unthinkingness forgets that it will ever end for him.he indulges his desires; illness and old age mean nothing to him; his mind is untroubled by envy or malice or thought of enemieswith their hatehoned swords. the whole world conforms to his will, he is kept from the worstuntil an element of overweening enters him and takes holdwhile the soul’s guard, its sentry, drowses, grown too distracted. a killer stalks him, an archer who draws a deadly bow.and then the man is hit in the heart, the arrow flies beneath his defenses,the devious promptings of the demon start. his old possessions seem paltry to him now. he covets and resents; dishonors customand bestows no gold; and because of good things that the heavenly powers gave him in the past he ignores the shape of things to come.then finally the end arriveswhen the body he was lent collapses and falls prey to its death; ancestral possessionsand the goods he hoarded and inherited by another who lets them go with a liberal hand.o flower of warriors, beware of that trap. choose, dear beowulf, the better part,eternal rewards. do not give way to pride. for a brief while your strength is in bloombut it fades quickly; and soon there will follow illness or the sword to lay you low,or a sudden fire or surge of wateror jabbing blade or javelin from the air or repellent age. your piercing eyewill dim and darken; and death will arrive, dear warrior, to sweep you away.just so i ruled the ringdanes’ country for fifty years, defended them in wartime with spear and sword against constant assaults by many tribes i came to believemy enemies had faded from the face of the earth. still, what happened was a hard reversalfrom bliss to grief. grendel struckafter lying in wait. he laid waste the land and from that moment my mind was in dread of his depredations. so i praise godin his heavenly glory that i lived to beholdthis head dripping blood and after such harrowing i can look upon it in triumph at last.take your place, then, with pride and pleasure and move to the feast. tomorrow morningour treasure will be shared and showered upon you.the geat was elated and gladly obeyed the old man’s biding;; he sat on the bench.and soon all was restored, the same as before. happiness came back, the hall was thronged, and a banquet set forth; black night felland covered them in darkness. then the company rose for the old campaigner the grayhaired prince was ready for bed. and a need for restcame over the brave shieldbearing geat. he was a weary seafarer, far from home,so immediately a houseguard guided him out, one whose office entailed looking after whatever a thane on the road in those days might need or require. it was noble courtesy.that great heart rested. the hall towered,goldshingled and gabled, and the guest slept in it until the black raven with raucous glee announced heaven’s joy, and a hurry of brightness overran the shadows. warriors rose quickly, impatient to be off their own countrywas beckoning the nobles; and the bold voyager longed to be aboard his distant boat.then that stalwart fighter ordered hrunting to be brought to unferth, and bade unferthtake the sword and thanked him for lending it.he said he had found it a friend in battle and a powerful help; he put no blameon the blade’s cutting edge. he was a considerate man.and there the warriors stood in their wargear, eager to go, while their honored lord approached the platform where the other sat. the undaunted hero addressed hrothgar.beowulf, son of ecgtheow, spokenow we who crossed the wide sea have to inform you that we feel a desireto return to hygelac. here we have been welcomed and thoroughly entertain. you have treated us well. if there is any favor on earth i can performbeyond deeds of arms i have done already, anything that would merit your affections more, i shall act, my lord, with alacrity.if ever i hear from across the oceanthat people on your borders are threatening battle as attackers have done from time to time,i shall land with a thousand thanes at my backto help your cause. hygelac may be young to rule a nation, but this much i knowabout the king of the geats he will come to my aid and want to support me by word and actionin your hour of need, when honor dictates that i raise a hedge of spears around you. then if hrethric should think about traveling as a king’s son to the court of the geats,he will find many friend. foreign placesyield more to one who is himself worth meeting.hrothgar spoke and answered him the lord in his wisdom sent you those words and they came from the heart. i have never heard so young a man make truer observations.you are strong in body and mature in mind, impressive in speech. if it should come to pass that hrethel’s descendant dies beneath a spear, if deadly battle or the sword blade or disease fells the prince who guards your peopleand you are still alive, i firmly believethe seafaring geats won’t find a man worthier of acclaim as their king and defender than you, if only you would undertakethe lordship of your homeland. my liking for you deepens with time, dear beowulf.what you have done is to draw two peoples, the geat nation and us neighboring danes, into shared peace and a pact of friendshipin spite of hatreds we have harbored in the past. for as long as i rule this farflung landtreasures will change hands and each side will treat the other with gifts;; across the gannet’s bath, over the broad sea, whorled prows will bring presents and tokens. i know your peopleare beyond reproach in every respect,steadfast in the old way with friend or foe.then the earl’s defender furnished the hero with twelve treasures and told him to set out, sail with those gifts safely home to the people he loved, but to return promptly.and so the good and grayhaired dane, that highborn king, kissed beowulf and embraced his neck, then broke down in sudden tears. two forebodingsdisturbed him in his wisdom, but one was stronger nevermore would they meet each otherface to face. and such was his affection that he could not help being overcomehis fondness for the man was so deepfounded, it warmed his heart and wound the heartstrings tight in his breast. the embrace endedand beowulf, glorious in his gold regalia, stepped on the green earth. straining at anchor and ready for boarding, his boat awaited him.so they went on their journey, and hrothgar’s generositywas praised repeatedly. he was a peerless king until old age sapped his strength and did him mortal harm, as it has done so many.down to the waves then, dressed in the webof their chainmail and warshirts the young men marched in high spirits. the coastguard spied them, thanes setting forth, the same as before. his salute this time from the top of the cliffwas far from unmannerly; he galloped to meet them and as they took ship in their shinning gear,he said how welcome they would be in geatland. then the broad hull was beached on the sandto be cargoed with treasure, horses and wargear. the curved prow motioned; the mast stood high above hrothgar’s riches in the loaded hold.the guard who had watched the boat was given  a sword with gold fittings and in future days that present would make him a respected man at his place on the meadbench.then the keel plungedand shook in the sea; and they sailed from denmark.right away the mast was rigged with its seashawl; sail ropes were tightened, timbers drummedand stiff winds kept the wavecrosser skimming ahead; as she heaved forward, her foamy neck was fleet and buoyant,a lapped prow loping over currents, until finally the geats caught sight of coastline and familiar cliffs. the keel reared up,wind lifted it home, it hit on the land.the harbor guard came hurrying outto the rolling water he had watched the offing long and hard, on the lookout for those friends. with the anchor cables, he moored their craft right where it had beached, in case a backwash might catch the hull and carry it away.then he ordered the prince’s treasuretrove to be carried ashore. it was a short step from there to where hrethel’s son and heir, hygelac the goldgiver, makes his homeon a secure cliff, in the company of retainers.the building was magnificent, the king majestic, ensconced in his hall; and although hygd, his queen, was young, a few short years at court,her mind was thoughtful and her manners sure.haereth’s daughter behaved generouslyand stinted nothing when she distributed bounty to the geats. great queen modthryth perpetrated terrible wrongs.if any retainer ever made boldto look her in the face, if an eye not her lord’sstared at her directly during daylight, the outcome was sealed he was boundin handtightened shackles, racked, tortured until doom was announceddeath by the sword, slash of blade, blood gush and death qualmsin an evil display. even a queen outstanding in beauty must not overstep like that.a queen should weave peace, not punish the innocent with loss of life for imagined insults.but hemming’s kinsman put a halt to her ways and drinkers round the table had another tale she was less of a bane to people’s lives,less cruelminded, after she was married to the brave offa, a bride arrayedin her gold finery, given awayby a caring father, ferried to her young prince over dim seas. in days to comeshe would grace the throne and grow famous for her good deeds and conduct of life,her high devotion to the hero king who was the best king, it has been said, between the two seas or anywhere elseon the face of the earth. offa was honored far and wide for his generous ways,his fighting spirit and his farseeingdefense of his homeland; from him there sprang eomer, garmund’s grandson, kinsman of hemming, his warrior’s mainstay and master of the field.heroic beowulf and his band of men crossed the wide strand, striding along the sandy foreshore; the sun shone,the world’s candle warmed them from the southas they hastened to where, as they had heard,the young king, ongentheow’s killerand his people’s protector, was dispensing ringsinside his bawn. beowulf’s return was reported to hygelac as soon as possible, news that the captain was now in the enclosure, his battlebrother back from the frayalive and well, walking back to the hall.room was quickly made, on the king’s orders,and the troops filed across the cleared floor.after hygelac had offered greetings to his loyal thane in lofty speech,he and his kinsman, that hale survivor,sat face to face. haereth’s daughter moved about with the meadjug in her hand, taking care of the company, filling the cups that warriors held out. then hygelac began to put courteous questions to his old comrade in the high hall. he hankered to knowevery tale the seageats had to tell.how did you fare on your foreign voyage, dear beowulf, when you abruptly decided to sail away across the salt waterand fight at heorot? did you help hrothgar much in the end? could you ease the prince of his wellknown troubles? your undertaking cast my spirits down, i dreaded the outcome of your expedition and pleaded with youlong and hard to leave the killer be, let the southdanes settle their ownbloodfeud with grendel. so god be thanked i am granted this sight of you, safe and sound.beowulf, son of ecgtheow, spokewhat happened, lord hygelac, is hardly a secret any more among men in this world myself and grendel coming to gripson the very spot where he visited destruction on the victoryshieldings and violatedlife and limb, loses i avengedso no earthly offspring of grendel’s need ever boast of that bout before dawn, no matter know long the last of his evil family survives.when i first landedi hastened to the ringhall and saluted hrothgar. once he had discovered why i had come the son of halfdane sent me immediately to sit with his own sons on the bench.it was a happy gathering. in my whole life i have never seen mead enjoyed morein any hall on earth. sometimes the queen herself appeared, peacepledge between nations, to hearten the young ones and hand outa torque to a warrior, then take her place.sometimes hrothgar’s daughter distributed ale to older ranks, in order on the benches i heard the company call her freawaruas she made her rounds, presenting menwith the gemstudded bowl, young bridetobe to the gracious ingeld, in her goldrimmed attire. the friend of the shieldings favors her betrothal the guardian of the kingdom sees good in itand hoped this woman will heal old wounds and grievous feuds.but generally the spear is prompt to retaliate when a prince is killed, no matter how admirable the bride may be.think how the heathobards will be bound to feel,their lord, ingeld, and his loyal thanes,when he walks in with that woman to the feast danes are at the table, being entertained, honored guest in glittering regalia,burnished ringmail that was their hosts’ birthright, looted when the heathobards could no longer wield their weapons in the shieldclash, when they went downwith their beloved comrades and forfeited their lives. then an old spearman will speak while they are drinking, having glimpsed some heirloom that brings alive memories of the massacre; his mood will darkenand heartstricken, in the stress of his emotion, he will begin to test a youngman’s temper and stir up trouble, starting like thisnow, my friend, don’t you recognize your father’s sword, his favorite weapon,then one he wore when he went out in his warmask to face the danes on that final day? after wethergeld died and his men were doomed the shieldings quickly took the field,and now here’s the son of one or otherof those same killers coming through our hall overbearing us, mouthing boasts,and rigged in armor that by right is yours.’ and so he keeps on, recalling and accusing, working things up with bitter wordsuntil one of the lady’s retainers liesspattered in blood, split open on his father’s account. the killer knows the lie of the land and escaped with his life. then on both sides the oathbound lords will break the peace, a passionate hatewill build up in ingeld and love for his bride will falter in him as the feud rankles.i therefore suspect the good faith of the heathobards, the truth of their friendship and the trustworthiness of their alliance with the danes.but now, my lord,i shall carry on with my account of grendel, the whole story of everything that happened in the handtohand fight.after heaven’s gemhad gone mildly to earth, that maddened spirit, the terror of those twilights, came to attack us where we stood guard, still safe inside the hall. there deadly violence came down on handscio and he fell as fate ordained, the first to perish,rigged out for the combat. a comrade from our rankshad come to grief in grendel’s mawhe ate up the entire body. there was blood on his teeth, he was bloated and furious, all roused up, yet still unreadyto leave the hall emptyhanded;renowned for his might, he matched himself against me, wildly reaching. he had this roomy pouch,a strange accoutrement, intricately strung and hung at the ready, a rare patchwork of devilishly fitting dragonskins.i had done him no wrong, yet the raging demonwanted to cram me and many another into this bagbut it was not to be once i got to my feet in a blind fury.it would take too long to tell how i repaid the terror of the land for every life he took and so won credit for you, my king,and for all your people. and although he got away to enjoy life’s sweetness for a while longer, his right hand stayed behind him in heorot, evidence of his miserable overthrowas he dived into murk on the mere bottom. i got lavish rewards from the lord of the danesfor my part in the battle, beaten gold and much else, once morning cameand we took our places at the banquet table. there was singing and excitement an old reciter, a carrier of stories, recalled the early days.at times some hero made the timbered harp tremble with sweetness, or related true and tragic happenings; at times the kinggave the proper turn to some fantastic tale, or a battlescarred veteran, bowed with age, would begin to remember the martial deeds of his youth and prime and be overcomeas the past welled up in his wintry heart.we were happy there the whole day long and enjoyed our time until another night descended upon us. then suddenlythe vehement mother avenged her sonand wreaked destruction. death had robbed her;geats had slain grendel, so his ghastly dam struck back and with barefaced defiance laid a man low. thus life departedfrom the sage auschere, an elder wise in council. but afterwards, on the morning following,the danes could not burn the dead body nor lay the remains of the man they lovedon his funeral pyre. she had fled with the corpse and taken refuge beneath torrents on the mountain. it was a hard blow for hrothgar to bear, harder than any he had undergone before. and so the heartsore king beseeched me in your royal name to take my chances underwater, to win gloryand prove my worth. he promised me rewards. hence, as is well known, i went to my encounter with the terrormonger at the bottom of the tarn. for a while it was handtohand between us, then blood went curdling along the currents and i beheaded grendel’s mother in the hallwith a mighty sword. i barely managed to escape with my life; my time had not yet come. but halfdane’s heir, the shelter of those earls, again endowed me with gifts in abundance.thus the king acted with due custom.i was paid and recompensed completely, given full measure and the freedom to choosefrom hrothgar’s treasures by hrothgar himself.these, king hygelac, i am happy to present to you as gifts. it is still upon your gracethat all favor depends. i have few kinsman who are close, my king, except for your kind self.then he order the boarframed standard to be brought,the battletopping helmet, the mailshirt gray as hoarfrost and the precious warsword; and proceeded with his speech. when hrothgar presented this wargear to mehe instructed, my lord, to give you some account of why it signifies his special favor.he said it had belonged to his older brother, king heorogar, who had long kept it,but that heorogar had never bequeathed it to his son heoroweard, that worthy scion, loyal as he was.enjoy it well. i heard four horses were handed over next. beowulf bestowed four bay steedsto go with the armor, swift gallopers, all alike. so ought a kinsman act, instead of plotting and planning in secretto bring people to grief, or conspiring to arrange the death of comrades. the warrior kingwas uncle to beowulf and honored by his nephew each was concerned for the other’s good.i heard he presented hygd with a gorget,the priceless torque that the prince’s daughter, wealhtheow, had given him; and three horses, supple creatures, brilliantly saddled.the bright necklace would be luminous on hygd’s breast.thus beowuld bore himself with valor;he was formidable in battle yet behaved with honor and took no advantage never cut downa comrade who was drunk, kept his temper and, warrior that he was, watched and controlled his godsent strength and his outstanding natural powers. he had been poorly regarded for a long time, was taken by the geatsfor less than he was worth and their lord too had never much esteemed him in the meadhall. they firmly believed that he lacked force,that the prince was a weakling; but presently every affront to his deserving was reversed.the battlefamed king, bulwark of his earls, ordered a goldchased heirloom of hrethel’sto be brought in; it was the best exampleof a gemstudded sword in the geat treasury. this he laid on beowulf’s lapand then rewarded him with land as well, seven thousand hides, and a hall and a throne. both owned land by birth in that country, ancestral ground; but the greater rightand sway were inherited by the higher born.a lot was to happen in later days in the fury of battle. hygelac felland the shelter of heardred’s shield proved useless against the fierce aggression of the shylfings ruthless swordsmen, seasoned campaigners,they came against him and his conquering nation, and with cruel force cut him downso that afterwardsthe wide kingdom reverted to beowulf. he ruled it well for fifty winters, grew old and wiseas warden of the land until one beganto dominate the dark, a dragon on the prowl from the steep vaults of a stoneroofed barrowwhere he guarded a hoard; there was a hidden passage, unknown to men, but someone managedto enter by it and interferewith the heathen trove. he had handled and removed a gemstudded goblet; it gained him nothing,though with a thief’s wiles he had outwittedthe sleeping dragon; that drove him into rage,as the people of that country would soon discover. the intruder who broached the dragon’s treasureand moved him to wrath had never meant to. it was desperation on the part of a slave fleeing the heavy hand of some master, guiltridden and on the run,going to ground. but he soon beganto shake with terror…………..in shock the wretch…………………………….………………………..panicked and ranaway with the precious…………………. metalwork. there were many other heirlooms heaped inside the earthhouse, because long ago, with deliberate care, somebody now forgottenhad buried the riches of a highborn race in this ancient cache. death had come and taken them all in times gone by and the only one left to tell their tale,the last of their line, could look forward to nothingbut the same fate for himself he foresaw that his joy in the treasure would be brief.a newly constructed barrow stood waiting, on a wide headland close to the waves, its entryway secured. into it the keeper of the hoard had carried all the goods and golden wareworth preserving. his words were fewnow, earth, hold what earls once heldand heroes can no more; it was mined from you first by honorable men. my own peoplehave been ruined in war; one by one they went down to death, looked their laston sweet life in the hall. i am left with nobody to bear a sword or burnish plated goblets,put a sheen on the cup. the companies have departed. the hard helmet, hasped with gold,will be stripped of its hoops; and the helmetshiner who should polish the metal of the warmask sleeps; the coat of mail that came through all fights, through shieldcollapse and cut of sword,decays with the warrior. now may webbed mail range far and wide on a warlord’s backbeside his mustered troops. no trembling harp, no tuned timber, no tumbling hawkswerving through the hall, no swift horse pawing the courtyard. pillage and slaughter have emptied the earth of entire peoples.and so he mourned as he moved about the world, deserted and alone, lamenting his unhappiness day and night, until death’s floodbrimmed up in his heart. then an old harrower of the dark happened to find the hoard open,the burning one who hunts out barrows,the slickskinned dragon, threatening the night sky with streamers of fire. people on the farmsare in dread of him. he is driven to hunt out hoards under ground, to guard heathen gold through agelong vigils, though to little avail. for three centuries, this scourge of the people had stood guard on that stoutly protectedunderground treasury, until the intruder unleashed its fury; he hurried to his lord with the goldplated cup and made his plea to be reinstated. then the vault was rifled, the ringhoard robbed, and the wretched man had his request granted. his master gazed on that find from the past for the first time.when the dragon awoke, trouble flared again. he rippled down the rock, writhing with angerwhen he saw the footprints of the prowler who had stolen too close to his dreaming head. so may a man not marked by fate easily escape exile and woe by the grace of god.the hoardguardianscorched the ground as he scoured and hunted for the trespasser who had troubled his sleep. hot and savage, he kept circling and circling the outside of the mound. no man appeared in that desert waste, but he worked himself up by imagining battle;; then back in he’d goin search of the cup, only to discover signs that someone had stumbled uponthe golden treasures. the guardian of the mound, the hoardwatcher, waited for the gloamingwith fierce impatience; his pentup furyat the loss of the vessel made him long to hit back and lash out in flames. then, to his delight,the day waned and he could wait no longer behind the wall, but hurtled forthin a fiery blaze. the first to sufferwere the people on the land, but before long it was their treasuregiver who would come to grief.the dragon began to belch out flamesand burn bright homesteads; there was a hot glow that scared everyone, for the vile skywinger would leave nothing alive in his wake.everywhere the havoc he wrought was in evidence. far and near, the geat nationbore the brunt of his brutal assaultsand virulent hate. then back to the hoardhe would dart before daybreak, to hide in his den. he had swinged the land, swathed it in flame, in fire and burning, and now he felt securein the vaults of his burrow; but his trust was unavailing. then beowulf was given bad news, a hard truth his own home,the best of buildings, had been burnt to a cinder, the throneroom of the geats. it threw the hero into deep anguish and darkened his moodthe wise man thought he must have thwartedancient ordinance of the eternal lord, broken his commandment. his mind was in turmoil, unaccustomed anxiety and gloomconfused his brain; the firedragonhad rased the coastal region and reduced forts and earthworks to dust and ashes,so the warking planned and plotted his revenge. the warriors’ protector, prince of the halltroop, ordered a marvelous alliron shieldfrom his smithy works. he well knewthat linden boards would let him down and timber burn. after many trials,he was destined to face the end of his days in this mortal world; as was the dragon, for all his leasehold on the treasure.yet the prince of the rings was too proud to line up with a large armyagainst the skyplague. he had scant regard for the dragon as a threat, no dread at allof its courage or strength, for he had kept goingoften in the past, through perils and ordeals of every sort, after he had purgedhrothgar’s hall, triumphed in heorotand beaten grendel. he outgrappled the monster and his evil kin.one of his cruelesthandtohand encounters had happened when hygelac, king of the geats, was killed in friesland the people’s friend and lord, hrethel’s son, slaked a sword blade’s thirst for blood. but beowulf’s prodigiousgifts as a swimmer guaranteed his safety he arrived at the shore, shouldering thirty battledresses, the booty he had won.there was little for the hetware to be happy aboutas they shielded their faces and fighting on the ground began in earnest. with beowulf against them,few could hope to return home.across the wide sea, desolate and alone,the son of ecgtheow swam back to his people. there hygd offered him throne and authorityas lord of the ringhoard with hygelac dead, she had no belief in her son’s abilityto defend their homeland against foreign invaders. yet there was no way the weakened nationcould get beowulf to give in and agree to be elevated over heardred as his lord or to undertake the office of kingship.but he did provide support for the prince, honored and minded him until he matured as the ruler of geatland.then over searoadsexiles arrived, sons of ohthere. they had rebelled against the best of allthe seakings in sweden, the one who held sway in the shylfing nation, their renowned prince, lord of the meadhall. that marked the endfor hygelac’s son his hospitalitywas mortally rewarded with wounds from a sword. heardred lay slaughtered and onela returnedto the land of sweden, leaving beowulf to ascend the throne, to sit in majesty and rule over the geats. he was a good king.     in days to come, he contrived to avenge the fall of his prince; he befriended eadgilswhen eadgils was friendless, aiding his cause with weapons and warriors over the wide sea, sending him men. the feud was settledon a comfortless campaign when he killed onela.and so the son of ecgtheow had survived every extreme, excelling himselfin daring and in danger, until the day arrivedwhen he had to come face to face with the dragon. the lord of the geats took eleven comrades and went in a rage to reconnoiter.by then he had discovered the cause of the affliction being visited on the people. the precious cuphad come to him from the hand of the finder, the one who had started all this strifeand was now added as a thirteenth to their number. they pressganged and compelled this poor creature to be their guide. against his willhe led them to the earthvault he alone knew, an underground barrow near the seabillows and heaving waves, heaped insidewith exquisite metalwork. the one who stood guard was dangerous and watchful, warden of that trove buried under earth no easy bargainwould be made in that place by any man.the veteran king sat down on the clifftop.he wished good luck to the geats who had shared his hearth and his gold. he was sad at heart,unsettled yet ready, sensing his own death. his fate hovered near, unknowable but certain it would soon claim his coffered soul, part life from limb. before longthe prince’s spirit would spin free from his body.beowulf, son of ecgtheow, spokemany a skirmish i survived when i was young and many times of war; i remember them well. at seven, i was fostered out by my father,left in the charge of my people’s lord.king hrethel kept me and took care of me, was openhanded, behaved lie a kinsman. while i was his ward, he treated me no worseas a wean about the place than one of his own boys, herebeald and haethcyn, or my own hygelac.for the eldest, herebeald, an unexpected deathbed was laid out, through a brother’s doing, when haethcyn bent his horntipped bowand loosed the arrow that destroyed his life. he shot wide and buried a shaftin the flesh and blood of his own brother. that offence was beyond redress, a wrong footingof the heart’s affections;; for who could avenge the prince’s life or pay his deathprice?it was like the misery felt by an old man who has lived to see his son’s body swing on the gallows. he begins to keen and weep for his boy, watching the ravengloat where he hangs he can be of no help. the wisdom of age is worthless to him.morning after morning, he wakes to remember that his child is gone; he has no interest in living on until another heiris born in the hall, now that his firstbornhas entered death’s dominion forever.he gazes sorrowfully at his son’s dwelling, the banquet hall bereft of all delight,the windswept hearthstone; the horsemen are sleeping, the warriors underground; what was is no more.no tunes from the harp, no cheer raised in the yard.alone with his longing, he lies down on his bed and sings a lament; everything seems too large, the steadings and the fields.such was the feelingof loss endured by the lord of the geatsafter herebeald’s death. he was hopelessly placedto set to rights the wrong committed,could not punish the killer in accordance of the law of the bloodfeud, although he felt no love for him. heartsore, wearied, he turned awayfrom life’s joys, chose god’s lightand departed, leaving buildings and lands to his sons, as a man of substance will.then over the wide seas swedes and geats battled and feuded and fought without quarter. hostilities broke out when hrethel died.ongentheow’s sons were unrelenting,refusing to make peace, campaigning violently from coast to coast, constantly setting up terrible ambushes around hreasnshill.my own kith and kin avengedthese evil events, as everybody knows, but the price was high one of them paid with his life. heathcyn, lord of the geats, met his fate there and fell in battle.then, as i have heard, hygelac’s swordwas raised in the morning against ongentheow,his brother’s killer. when eofor cleftthe old swede’s helmet, halved it open,he fell, deathpale his feudcalloused hand could not stave off the fatal stroke.the treasures that hygelac lavished on me i paid for as i fought, as fortune allowed me, with my glittering sword. he gave me land and the security land brings, so he had no call to go looking for some lesser champion, some mercenary among the grifthasor the speardanes or the men of sweden. i marched ahead of him, always thereat the front of the line; and i shall fight like that for as long as i live, as long as this swordshall last, which has stood me in good stead late and soon, ever since i killeddayraven the frank in front of the two armies. he brought back no looted breastplateto the frisian king, but fell in battle,their standardbearer, highborn and brave. no sword blade sent him to his death,my bare hands stilled his heartbeatsand wrecked the bonehouse. now blade and hand, sword and swordstroke, will assay the hoard.beowulf spoke, made a formal boast for the last time i risked my lifeoften when i was young. now i am old,but as king of this people i shall pursue this fight for the glory of winning, if the evil one will only abandon his earthfort and face me in the open.then he addressed each dear companionone final time, those fighters in their helmets, resolute and highborn i would rather not use a weapon if i knew another wayto grapple with the dragon and make good my boast  as i did against grendel in days gone by. but i shall be meeting molten venomin the fire he breaths, so i go forthin mailshirt and shield. i won’t shift a footwhen i meet the caveguard what occurs on the wall between the two of us will turn out as fate,overseer of men, decides. i am resolved.i scorn further words against this skyborn foe.men at arms, remain here on the barrow,safe in your armor, to see which one of us is better in the end at bearing woundsin a deadly fray. this fight is not yours, nor is it up to any man except meto measure his strength against the monster or to prove his worth. i shall win the gold by my courage, or else mortal combat, doom of battle, will bear your lord away.then he drew himself up beside his shield. the fabled warrior in his warshirt and helmettrusted in his own strength entirely and went under the crag. no coward path. hard by the rockface that hale veteran,a good man who had gone repeatedlyinto combat and danger and come through, saw a stone arch and a gushing streamthat burst from the barrow, blazing and wafting a deadly heat. it would be hard to survive unscathed near the hoard, to hold firmagainst the dragon in those flaming depths.then he gave a shout. the lord of the geats unburdened his breast and broke out in a storm of anger. under gray stonehis voice challenged and resounded clearly. heat was ignited. the hoardguard recognized a human voice, the time was overfor peace and parleying. pouring forthin a hot battlefume, the breath of the monsterburst from the rock. there was a rumble underground. down there in the barrow, beowulf the warriorlifted his shield the outlandish thing writhed and convulsed and viciouslyturned on the king, whose keenedgedsword, and heirloom inherited by ancient right,was already in his hand. roused to a fury, each antagonist struck terror in the other.unyielding, the lord of his people loomed by his tall shield, sure of his ground,while the serpent looped and unleashed itself. swaddled in flames, it came gliding and flexingand racing toward its fate. yet his shield defended the renowned leader’s life and limbfor a shorter time than he meant it tothat final day was the first timewhen beowulf fought and fate denied him glory in battle. so the king of the geats raised his hand and struck hardat the enameled scales, but hardly cut through the blade flashed and slashed yet the blowwas far less powerful than the hardpressed kinghad need of at the moment. the hoardkeeper went into a spasm and spouted deadly flames when he felt the stroke, battlefirebillowed and spewed. beowulf was foiled of a glorious victory. the glittering sword, infallible before that day,failed when he unsheathed it, as it never should have. for the son of ecgtheow, it was no easy thingto have to give ground like that and go unwillingly to inhabit another homein a place beyond; so every man must yield the leasehold of his days.before longthe fierce contenders clashed again.the hoardguard took heart, inhaled and swelled up and got a new wind; he who had once ruledwas furled in fire and had to face the worst. no help or backing was to be had thenfrom his highborn comrades; that handpicked troop broke ranks and ran for their livesto the safety of the wood. but within one heart sorrow welled up in a man of worth the claims of kinship cannot be denied.his name was wiglaf, a son of weohstan’s,a wellregarded shylfing warriorrelated to aelfhere. when he saw his lord tormented by the heat of his scalding helmet,he remember the bountiful gifts he bestowed on him, how well he lived among the waegmundings,the freehold he inherited from his father before him. he could not hold back one hand brandishedthe yellowtimbered shield, the other drew his sword  an ancient blade that was said to have belongedto eanmund, the son of ohthere, the oneweohstan had slain when he was in exile without friends.he carried the arms to the victim’s kinfolk, the burnished helmet, the webbed chainmail, and that relic of the giants. but onela returned the weapons to him, rewarded weohstan with eadmund’s war gear. he ignored the bloodfeud, the fact that eadmund was his brother’s son. weohstan kept that wargear for a lifetime,  the sword and the mailshirt, until it was the son’s turn to follow his father and perform his part. then, in old age, at the end of his daysamong the weathergeats, he bequeathed to wiglaf innumerable weapons.and now the youthwas to enter the line of battle with his lord, his first time to be tested as a fighter. His spirit did not break, and the ancestral blade would keep its edge, as the dragon discoveredas soon as they came together in combat. sad at heart, addressing his companions, wiglaf spoke wise and fluent wordsi remember that time when the mead was flowing, how we pledged loyalty to our lord in the hall, promised our ringgiver we would be worth our price, make good the gift of the wargear,those swords and helmets, as and when his need required it. he picked us out from the army deliberately, honored us and judged us fit for this action, made me these lavish gifts  and all because he considered us the best of his armsbearing thanes. and now, although he wanted this challenge to be the one he’d face by himself alone the shepherd of our land, a man unequalled in the quest for glory and a name for daring now the day has come when this lord we serve needs sound mento give him their support. let us go to him, help our leader through the hot flame and dread of the fire. as god is my witness,  I would rather my body were robbed in the same burning blaze as my gold giver’s body than go back home bearing arms. That is unthinkable, unless we have first slain the foe and defended the life of the prince of the weathergeats. I well know that the things he has done for us deserve better. Should he alone be left exposed to fall in battle? we must bond together, shield and helmet, mail shirt and sword.  then he wadded the dangerous reek and wentunder arms to his lord, saying only go on, dear beowulf, do everything you said you would when you were still young and vowed you would never let your name and fame be dimmed while you lived. your deeds are famous, so stay resolute, my lord, defend your life now with the whole of your strength. I shall stand by you. After those word, a wildness rose in the dragon again and drove it to attack,  heaving up fire, hunting for enemies, the humans it loathed. flames lapped the shield, charred it to the boss, and the body armor on the young warrior was useless to him. but wiglaf did well under the wide rim beowulf shared with him once his own had shattered in sparks and ashes.inspired againby the thought of glory, the warking threw his whole strength behind a swordstrokeand connected with the skull. and naegling snapped. beowulf’s ancient irongray swordlet him down in the fight. it was never his fortune to be helped in combat by the cuttingedgeof weapons made of iron. when he yielded a sword, no matter how blooded and hardedged the blade his hand was too strong, the stroke he dealt(i have heard) would ruin it. he could reap no advantage.then the bane of that people, the firebreathing dragon, was mad to attack for a third time.when a chance came, he caught the hero  in a rush of flames and clamped sharp fangs into his neck. beowulf’s body ran wet with his lifeblood it came welling out.next thing, they say, the noble son of weohstan saw the king in danger at his sideand displayed his inborn bravery and strength. he left the head alone, but his fighting handwas burned when he came to his kinsman’s aid.he lunged at the enemy lower downso that his decorated sword sank into its belly  and the flames grew weaker.once again the kinggathered his strength and drew a stabbing knife he carried on his belt, sharpened for battle.he stuck it deep into the dragon’s flank.beowulf dealt it a deadly wound.they had killed the enemy, courage quelled his life; that pair of kinsmen, partners in nobility, had destroyed the foe. so, every man should act, be at hand when needed; but now, for the king,this would be the last of his many labors  and triumphs in the world.then the wound dealt by the groundburner earlier began to scald and swell; beowulf discovered deadly poison suppurating inside him, surges of nausea, and so, in his wisdom, the prince realized his state and struggled towards a seat on the rampart. he steadied his gaze on those gigantic stones, saw how the earthwork was braced with arches built over columns. and now that thane unequalled for goodness  with his own hands washed his lord’s wounds, swabbed the weary prince with water, bathed him clean, unbuckled his helmet. beowulf spoke in spite of his wounds, mortal wounds, he still spoke for he well knew his days in the world had been lived out to the end his allotted time was drawing to a close, death was very near. now is the time when i would have wanted to bestow this armor on my own son,  had it been my fortune to have fathered an heir and live on in his flesh. for fifty years i ruled this nation. no king of any neighboring clan would dare face me with troops, none had the power to intimidate me. i took what came, cared for and stood by things in my keeping, never fomented quarrels, never swore a lie. all this consoles me, doomed as i am and sickening for death;  because of my right way, the ruler of mankind need never blame me when the breath leaves my body for murder of kinsmen. go now quickly, dearest wiglaf, under the gray stone where the dragon is laid out, lost to his treasure; hurry to feast your eyes on the hoard. away you go i want to examine that ancient gold, gaze my fill on those garnered jewels; my going will be easier for having seen the treasure, a less troubled letting go of the life and lordship i have long maintained. and so, i have heard, the son of weohstan quickly obeyed the command of his languishing warweary lord; he went in his chainmail under the rockpile roof of the barrow, exulting in his triumph, and saw beyond the seat a treasure trove of astonishing richness, wall hangings that were a wonder to behold, glittering gold spread across the ground, the old dawn scorching serpent’s den  packed with goblets and vessels of the past, tarnished and corroding. rusty helmets all eaten away. armbands everywhere, artfully wrought. how easily treasure buried in the ground, gold hidden however skillfully, can escape from any man! and he saw too a standard, entirely of gold, hanging high over the hoard, a masterpiece of filigree; it glowed with light so he could make out the ground at his feet  and inspect the valuables. of the dragon there was no remaining sign the sword had dispatched him. then, the story goes, a certain man plundered the hoard in the immemorial howe, filled his arms with flagons and plates, anything he wanted; and took the standard also, most brilliant of banners. already the blade of the old king’s sharp killingswordhad done its worst the one who had for longminded the hoard, hovering over gold,  unleashing fire, surging forth midnight after midnight, had been mown down.wiglaf went quickly, keen to get back, excited by the treasure. anxiety weighedon his brave hearthe was hoping he would find the leader of the geats alive where he had left him helpless, earlier, on the open ground.so he came to the place, carrying the treasure, and found his lord bleeding profusely,his life at an end again he began  to swab his body. the beginnings of an utterance broke out from the king’s breast cage. the old lord gazed sadly at the gold.to the everlasting lord of all,to the king of glory, i give thanksthat i beheld this treasure here in front of me, that i have been allowed to leave my people so well endowed on the day i die.now that i have bartered my last breathto own this fortune, it is up to you  to look after their needs. i can hold out no longer.order my troop to construct a barrowon a headland on the coast, after my pyre has cooled. it will loom in the horizon at hronesnessand be a reminder among my people so that in coming times crews under sail will call it beowulf’s barrow, as they steer ships across the wide and shrouded waters.then the king in his greatheartedness unclaspedthe collar of gold from his neck and gave it  to the young thane, telling him to useit and the war shirt and the gilded helmet well. you are the last of us, the only one leftof the waegmundings. fate swept us away, sent my whole brave highborn clanto their final doom. now i must follow them. that was the warrior’s last word.he had no more to confide. the furious heat of the pyre would assail him. his soul fled from his breast to its destined place among the steadfast ones. it was hard then on the young hero, having to watch the one he held so dear there on the ground, going throughhis death agony. the dragon from underearth, his nightmarish destroyer, lay destroyed as well,utterly without life. no longer would his snake folds ply themselves to safeguard hidden gold.hardedged blades, hammered out and keenly filed, had finished him so that the sky roamer lay there rigid,  brought low beside the treasurelodge.never again would he glitter and glide and show himself off in midnight air, exulting in his riches he fell to earththrough the battlestrength in beowulf’s arm. there were few, indeed, as far as i have heard, big and brave as they may have been,few who would have held out if they had had to face the outpourings of that poisonbreatheror gone foraging on the ringhall floor  and found the deep barrowdwelleron guard and awake.the treasure had been won,bought and paid for by beowulf’s death.both had reached the end of the road through the life they had been lent.before longthe battledodgers abandoned the wood, the ones who had let down their lord earlier, the tailturners, ten of them together.when he needed them the most, they had made off.now they were ashamed and came behind shields,  in their battleoutfits, to where the old man lay.they watched wiglaf, sitting worn out,a comrade shoulder to shoulder with his lord, trying in vain to bring him round with water. much as he wanted to, there was no wayhe could preserve his lord’s life on earthor alter in the least the almighty’s will.what god judged right would rule what happened to every man, as it does to this day.then a stern rebuke was bound to come  from the young warrior to the ones who had been cowards. wiglaf, son of weohstan, spokedisdainfully and in disappointmentanyone ready to admit the truthwill surely realize the lord of menwho showered you with gifts and gave you the armor you are standing inwhen he would distribute helmets and mailshirts to men on the meadbenches, a prince treating his thanes in hallto the best he could find, far or near  was throwing weapons uselessly away.it would be a sad waste when the war broke out. beowulf had little cause to bragabout his armed guard; yet god who ordains who wins or loses allowed him to strikewith his own blade when bravery was needed. there was little i could do to protect his life in the heat of the fray, yet i found new strength welling up when i went to help him.then my sword connected and the deadly assaults  of our foe grew weaker, the fire coursedless strongly from his head. but when the worst happened too few rallied around the prince.so it is goodbye now to all you know and love on your homeground, the openhandedness, the giving of warswords. every one of you with freeholds of land, our whole nation,will be dispossessed, once princes from beyond get tidings of how you turned and fledand disgraced yourselves. a warrior will sooner die than live a life of shame.then he ordered the outcome of the fight to be reported to those camped on the ridge, that crowd of retainers who had sat all morning, sad at heart,shieldbearers wondering aboutthe man they loved would this day be his last or would he return. he told the truth and did not balk, the rider who borenews to the clifftop. he addressed them allnow the people’s pride and love. the lord of the geats, is laid on his deathbed,brought down by the dragon’s attack.beside him lies the bane of his life,dead from knifewounds. there was no way beowulf could manage to get the betterof the monster with his sword. wiglaf sits at beowulf’s side, the son of weohstan, the living warrior watching by the dead, keeping weary vigil, holding a wake for the loved and the loathed. now war is looming over our nation, soon it will be known to franks and frisians, far and wide,that the king is gone. hostility has been great among the franks since hygelac sailed forth at the head of a war fleet into Friesland there the hetware harried and attacked and overwhelmed him with great odds. the leader in his war gear was laid low, fell amongst followers; that lord did not favor his company with spoils. the merovingian king has been an enemy to us ever since.nor do i expect peace of pactkeeping of any sort from the swedes. remember at ravenswood, ongentheow slaughtered haethcyn, hrethel’s son, when the geat people in their arrogance first attacked the fierce shylfings.the return blow was quickly struckby ohthere’s father. old and terrible,he felled the seaking and saved is own  aged wife, the mother of onelaand of ohthere, bereft of her gold rings. then he kept hard on the heels of the foeand drove them, leaderless, lucky to get away, in a desperate route to ravenswood.his army surrounded the weary remnantwhere they nursed their wounds; all through the night he howled threats at those huddled survivors, promises to axe their bodies openwhen dawn broke, dangle them from gallows  to feed the birds. but at first lightwhen their spirits were lowest, relief arrived. they heard the sound of hygelac’s horn, his trumpet calling as he came to find them , the hero in pursuit, at hand with troops.the bloody swathe that swedes and geatscut through each other was everywhere.no one could miss their murderous feuding. then the old man made his move,pulled back, barred his people in  ongentheow withdrew to higher ground.hygelac’s pride and prowess as a fighterwere known to the earl; he had no confidencethat he could hold out against that horde of seamen, defend wife and the ones he lovedfrom the shock of the attack. he retreated for shelter behind the earth wall. then hygelac swoopedon the swedes at bay, his banners swarmed into their refuge, the geat forcesdrove forward to destroy the camp. there in his gray hairs, ongentheowwas cornered, ringed around with swords. and it came to pass that the king’s fate was in eofor’s hands, and in his alone.wulf, son of wonred, went for him in anger, split him open so that blood came spurting from under his hair. the old herostill did not flinch, but parried fast, hit back with a harder strokethe king turned and took him on.  then wonred’s son, the brave wulf, could land no blow against the aged lord. ongentheow divided his helmet so that he buckled and bowed his bloodied head and dropped to the ground. but his doom held off. though he was cut deep, he recovered again. with his brother down, the undaunted eofor, hygelac’s thane, hefted his sword and smashed murderously at the massive helmet past the lifted shield. and the king collapsed, the shepherd of people was sheared of life. many then hurried to help wulf, bandaged and lifted him, now that they were left masters of the bloodsoaked battleground. one warrior stripped the other, looted ongentheow’s iron mailcoat, his hard swordhilt, his helmet too, and carried the graith to king hygelac; he accepted the prize, promised fairly that reward would come, and kept his word.  for their bravery in action, when they arrived home eofor and wulf were overloadedby hrethel’s son, hygelac the geat, with gifts of land and linked ringsthat were worth a fortune. they had won glory, so there was no gainsaying his generosity. and he gave eofor his only daughter to bide at home with him, an honor and a bond. so this bad blood between us and the swedes, this vicious feud, i am convinced, is bound to revive; they will cross our borders and attack in force once they find out that beowulf is dead. in days gone by when our warriors fell and we were undefended he kept our coffers and our kingdoms safe. he worked for the people, but as well as that he behaved like a hero. we must hurry now to take a last look at the king and launch him, lord and lavisher of rings, on the funeral road. his royal pyre will melt no small amount of gold heaped there in the hoard, it was bought at heavy cost, and that pile of rings he paid for at the end with his own life will go up in flames, be furled in fire treasure no follower will wear in his memory, nor lovely woman link and attach as a torque around her neck but often, repeatedly, in the path of exile they shall walk bereft, bowed under woe, now that their leader’s laugh is silenced, high spirits quenched. many a spear dawncold to the touch will be taken down and waved on high; the swept harp won’t waken warriors, but the raven winging darkly over the doomed will have news, tidings of the eagle of how he hoked and ate, how the wolf and he made short work of the dead. such was the drift of the dire report that gallant man delivered. he got little wrong in what he told and predicted. the whole troop rose in tears, then took their way to the uncanny scene under earnaness. there, on the sand, where his soul had left him, they found him at rest, their ringgiver from days gone by. the great manhad breathed his last. beowulf the king had indeed met with a marvelous death. but what they saw first was far stranger the serpent on the ground, gruesome and vile, lying facing him. the firedragon was scaresomely burnt, scorched all colors. from head to tail, his entire length was fifty feet. he had shimmered forth on the night air once, then winged back down to his den; but death owned him now, he would never enter his earthgallery again. beside him stood pitchers and piledup dishes, silent flagons, precious swords eaten through with rust, ranged as they had been while they waited their thousand winters underground. that huge cache, gold inherited from an ancient race, was under a spell which meant no one was ever permitted to enter the kinghall unless god himself, mankind’s keeper, true king of triumphs, allowed some person pleasing him and in his eyes worthyto open the hoard. what came about brought to nothing the hopes of the one who had wrongly hidden riches under the rock face. first the dragon slew that man among men, who in turn made fierce amendsand settled the feud. famous for his deeds a warrior may be, but it remains a mystery where his life will end, when he may no longer dwell in the meadhall among his own. so it was with beowulf, when he faced the cruelty and cunning of the moundguard. he himself was ignorant of how his departure from the world would happen. the highborn chiefs who had buried the treasure declared it until doomsday so accursed  that whoever robbed it would be guilty of wrongand grimly punished for their transgression, hasped in hellbonds in heathen shrines. yet beowulf’s gaze at the gold treasure when he first saw it had not been selfish. wiglaf, son of weohstan, spoke often when one man follows his own will many are hurt. this happened to us. nothing we advised could ever convince the prince we loved, our land’s guardian, not to vex the custodian of the gold, let him lie where he was long accustomed, lurk there under the earth until the end of the world. he held to his high destiny. the hoard is laid bare, but at a grave cost; it was too cruel a fate that forced the king to that encounter. i have been inside and seen everything amassed in the vault. i managed to enter although no great welcome awaited me under the earth wall. i quickly gathered up a huge pile of the priceless treasures handpicked from the hoard and carried them here where the king could see them. he was still himself, alive, aware, and in spite of his weakness he had many requests. he wanted me to greet you and order the building of a barrow that would crown the site of his pyre, serve as his memorial,in a commanding position, since of all men to have lived and thrived and lorded it on earth his worth and due as a warrior were the greatest. now let us again go quickly and feast our eyes on that amazing fortune heaped under the wall. i will show the way and take you close to those coffers packed with rings and bars of gold. let a bier be made and got ready quickly when we come out and then let us bring the body of our lord, the man we loved, to where he will lodge for a long time in the care of the almighty. then weohstan’s son, stalwart to the end, had orders given to owners of dwellings, many people of importance in the land, to fetch wood from far and wide for the good man’s pyre. now shall flame consume our leader in battle, the blaze darken round him who stood his ground in the steelhail, when the arrowstorm shot from bowstrings pelted from the shieldwall. the shaft hit home. featherfledged, it finned the barb in flight. next the wise son of weohstan called from among the king’s thanes a group of seven he selected the best and entered with them, the eighth of their number, under the godcursed roof; one raised a lighted torch and led the way. no lots were cast for who should loot the hoard for it was obvious to them that every bit of it lay unprotected within the vault, there for the taking. it was no trouble to hurry to work and haul out the priceless store. they pitched the dragon over the cliff top, let tide’s flow and backwash take the treasureminder. then coiled gold was loaded on a cart in great abundance, and the grayhaired leader, the prince of his bier, born to hronesness. the geat people built a pyre for beowulf, stacked and decked it until it stood foursquare, hung with helmets, heavy warshields and shining armor, just as he had ordered.  then his warriors laid him in the middle of it, mourning a lord farfamed and beloved.on a height they kindled the hugest of all funeral fires; fumes of wood smoke billowed darkly up, the blaze roared and drowned out their weeping, wind died down and flames wrought havoc in the hot bonehouse, burning it to the core. they were disconsolate and wailed aloud for their lord’s decease. a geat woman too sang out in grief with hair bound up, she unburdened herself of her worst fears, a wild litanyof nightmare and lament her nation invaded, enemies on the rampage, bodies in piles, slavery and abasement. heaven swallowed the smoke. then the geat people began to construct a mound on a headland, high and imposing, a marker that sailors could see from far away, and in ten days they had done the work. it was their hero’s memorial;; what remained from fire they housed inside it, behind a wall as worthy of him as their workmanship could make it. and they buried torques in the barrow, and jewels and a trove of such things as trespassing menhad once dared to drag from the hoard. they let the ground keep that ancestral treasure, gold under gravel, gone to earth, as useless to men now as it ever was. then twelve warriors rode around the tomb, chieftain’s sons, champions in battle,  all of them distraught, chanting in dirges, mourning his loss as a man and a king. they extolled his heroic exploits and gave thanks for his greatness; which was the proper thing, for a man should praise a prince whom he holds dear and cherish his memory when that moment comes when he has to be convoyed from his bodily home. so the geat people, his hearth companions, sorrowed for the lord who had been laid low. they said that of all the kings upon the earth he was the man most gracious and airminded, kindest to his people and keenest to win fame.